                                                                                         D0001A-2019
   BANCA MONTE DEI PASCHI DI SIENA (BMPS) WITHDRAWS FROM THE
                                   EURIBOR BANK PANEL
Brussels, 7 January 2019 – Today, the European Money Markets Institute
(EMMI) announced Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena’s (BMPS) withdrawal
from the panel of banks contributing to the Euribor benchmark with
immediate effect. .
As part of the ongoing Euribor reform, EMMI expects to submit to the FSMA
its authorisation file as administrator of critical benchmarks by Q2 2019 as
planned. To ensure that banks are operationally ready and willing to
contribute under the new methodology, EMMI has called for the banks’
recommitment to their participation in the panel. It is in this context that
BMPS communicated its intention to withdraw from the Euribor Panel.
Following BMPS’ decision, EMMI performed an assessment of the
implications of the withdrawal on the capability of the benchmark to
measure its underlying market or economic reality. In line with the
guidelines set in the EU Benchmarks Regulation, EMMI submitted this
assessment to the FSMA. EMMI considered that the impact of BMPS’
withdrawal from the Euribor Panel on the representativeness and
robustness of the benchmark is limited. Subsequently, the FSMA, after
consultation with the Euribor College, informed EMMI that it would not
compel BMPS to continue to contribute data to Euribor because of BMPS’s
low level of actual and potential participation in the market that Euribor
intends to measure.
As a result, BMPS’ last contribution of input data toward the determination
of the Euribor benchmark took place on 7 January 2019.
Note for the editor:
The European Money Markets Institute – EMMI is an international non-profit making association based in
Brussels (56, Ave des Arts, 1000 Brussels). It manages European financial benchmarks such as
Euribor®/Eonia® along with the Short Term European Paper (STEP) transparency initiative.

