Implementation of the new
definition of default
Process guidance for significant
institutions using the IRB approach
             June 2018

Contents
1  Background and rationale            3
   1.1    Introduction                 3
   1.2    Regulatory framework         7
   1.3    Supervisory process          8
2  Scope of the supervisory process   12
3  Content of the application package 14
4  Registry                           17
   4.1    General guidance            17
   4.2    Guidance on the template    19
5  Gap analysis                       28
   5.1    General guidance            28
   5.2    Guidance on the template    30
6  Qualitative impact analysis        41
   6.1    General guidance            42
   6.2    Guidance on the template    43
7  Quantitative impact analysis       49
   7.1    General guidance            49
   7.2    Methodology                 53
   7.3    Guidance on the template    58
8  Action plan                        71
   8.1    General guidance            71
   8.2    Guidance on the template    72
9  IT infrastructure                  78
   9.1    General guidance            78
   9.2    IT test checklist           79
10 Monitoring                         82
                                       1

11   FAQ process                            84
     11.1    General guidance               84
     11.2    Guidance on the template       85
12   Annex                                  87
     12.1    Clarifications                 87
     12.2    Further details on monitoring  95
Glossary/list of abbreviations             102
                                             2

1   Background and rationale
1.1 Introduction
    Against the backdrop of the requirements set out in Article 178 (6) and (7) of
    Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (the “CRR”) and as a result of the work carried out by
    the European Banking Authority (EBA) to identify the main drivers of variability in the
    implementation of IRB models, two key regulatory products were issued that make
    particular reference to the definition of default:
    1.     the draft Regulatory Technical Standards on materiality threshold for credit
           obligations past due under Article 178 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 ( “draft
           RTS”), adopted by the European Commission as Commission Delegated
           Regulation (EU) 2018/171 1 (“Delegated Regulation”);
    2.     the EBA Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article
           178 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 2 (EBA/GL/2016/07 – the “Guidelines”).
    The Delegated Regulation specifies the conditions according to which a competent
    authority shall set the materiality threshold for credit obligations past due referred to
    in Article 178(2)(d) of the CRR. The Guidelines provide detailed clarification on
    various aspects of the application of the definition of default, namely the criterion for
    determining the number of days past due for default identification, indications of
    unlikeliness to pay, conditions for the return to non-defaulted status, the application
    of the definition of default in external data, the application of the default definition in a
    banking group and specific aspects relating to retail exposures, and comprise
    guidance on documentation, internal policies and risk management processes.
    Both the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines apply in relation to the
    Standardised Approach for credit risk (“SA”) in accordance with Part Three, Title II,
    Chapter 2 of the CRR (by virtue of Article 127 of the CRR, which references Article
    178 of the CRR) and to the internal ratings based approach (“IRB approach”) in
    accordance with Part Three, Title II, Chapter 3 of the CRR.
    The Delegated Regulation entered into force on 26 February 2018. For significant
    institutions within the SSM, the level of the materiality threshold will be defined
    according to the conditions set out in the Delegated Regulation through the adoption
    of an ECB Regulation (“ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ”). The preliminary ECB
    stance with regard to the definition of the materiality threshold and, in particular, to
    the levels of its components, is presented in the draft text of the “ECB Regulation
    exercising a discretion under Article 178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in
    1
        Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018R0171&rid=1
    2
        Available at:
        https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1597103/Final+Report+on+Guidelines+on+default+defini
        tion+%28EBA-GL-2016-07%29.pdf/004d3356-a9dc-49d1-aab1-3591f4d42cbb
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                      3

relation to the threshold for assessing the materiality of credit obligations past due”,
under public consultation between 3 July and 17 August 2018.
According to paragraph 10 of the Guidelines, these guidelines apply from 1 January
2021 3; institutions should therefore incorporate the requirements and applicable
optional practices of these guidelines in their internal procedures and IT systems by
that time, but competent authorities may accelerate the timeline of this transition at
their discretion. The EBA encourages institutions to implement the changes before
this date 4. This is particularly important for institutions that use the IRB approach, as
the change in the definition of default may require further adjustments in their rating
systems and these institutions will therefore have to start building reliable time series
as early as possible.
In addition to the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
with the Delegated Regulation, ECB Regulation (EU) 2016/445 also has an impact
on the definition of default, since Article 4 of said regulation exercises the option
provided for in Article 178(1)(b) of the CRR and abolishes the “180 days past due”
criterion for all SSM significant institutions from 1 January 2017 for exposures
secured by residential property or SME commercial immovable property in the retail
exposure class, as well as exposures to public sector entities.
For institutions using the IRB approach, according to Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 in conjunction with the amendments set forth in
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/942 (“DR 529/2014”), a change in the
definition of default always constitutes a material model change requiring prior
permission from the competent authorities.
As anticipated in our letter of December 2016 providing information on the Targeted
Review of Internal Models (TRIM) project and other ongoing internal model
supervision projects, and further detailed in our letters of June and December 2017,
the ECB set up a process to address the implementation of the new definition of
default throughout the SSM for significant institutions (“institutions”) using the IRB
approach. The ECB’s objective is to address the EBA’s roadmap for the review of the
IRB approach while taking into account the institutions’ needs for a manageable and
streamlined process that will allow them to finalise the effective implementation of
the revised IRB framework by the end of 2020, as required by the EBA. The
envisaged approach, referred to as the “Two-Step Approach”, foresees two
sequential steps:
1.          the implementation of the new definition of default;
2.          the necessary adjustments to risk parameters to take into account the new
definition of default and other necessary evolutions (principally stemming from other
regulatory products and follow-up on previous internal model investigations).
3
    The ECB, as the competent authority for SSM significant institutions, has notified the EBA that it
    intends to comply with the GL by 1 January 2021. See:
    https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1597103/EBA+GL+2016+07-
    CT+GLs+on+application+of+the+definition+of+default.pdf/8797444b-4aa7-4804-a2be-fd941c941c90.
4
    Cf. EBA/GL/2016/07, Executive Summary, page 3.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                             4

The new definition(s) of default to be implemented by institutions should reflect the
provisions set out in the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
conjunction with the Delegated Regulation. However, it is expected that institutions
have already incorporated the provisions of Article 4 of ECB Regulation (EU)
2016/445. Should affected institutions have not already requested permission to
implement the provisions of Article 4 of ECB Regulation (EU) 2016/445, they are
advised to do so as part of the process described in this document to ensure
compliance with ECB Regulation (EU) 2016/445.
According to the suggested process, in the first step of the envisaged Two-Step
Approach institutions using the IRB approach 5 are encouraged to focus on the
alignment of the processes, procedures and IT systems used for the identification of
defaults with the new definition of default and to request permission to implement
their new definition(s) of default by submitting a single application that covers all
rating systems 6. Within the application, however, permission to make the required
material changes in the definition of default must be requested at the level of each
rating system (cf. Article 143(3) and (4) of the CRR and DR 529/2014). To this end,
and to permit an efficient supervisory review of the applications, institutions should
include a self-assessment comprising the following elements in their application
package 7 to be submitted according to DR 529/2014:
1.      registry of all relevant definitions of default and rating systems used within their
        organisational structure;
2.      gap analysis between the definition of default currently implemented and a
        definition of default compliant with the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU)
        YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation;
3.      quantitative and/or qualitative impact analysis supplementing the gap analysis
        to gauge the impact of the changes on default rates, cure rates, risk parameters
        and capital absorption;
4.      action plan outlining all necessary changes and their implementation;
5.      documentation on the review of the IT infrastructure.
Institutions are expected to work on the registry, gap analysis, impact analysis and a
first draft of an action plan with particular focus on the scope of the supervisory
5
     Exposures under the Standardised Approach are outside the scope of this process.
6
     Note that, according to the DR 529/2014, the requests for approval of a material change in the
     definition of default would, in principle, be expected separately for each rating system under the IRB
     Approach.
     It is expected that institutions’ application packages will cover all definitions of default and,
     consequently, all rating systems. Nevertheless, in well-reasoned cases, the possibility of excluding a
     definition of default might be considered. In such cases, institutions should liaise with their respective
     relevant joint supervisory teams (JSTs) to agree on possible deviations from the general expectations
     before any application package is submitted to the ECB.
7
     If an institution can demonstrate that there are no gaps between the definition(s) of default currently
     implemented and one(s) compliant with the GL and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
     with the Delegated Regulation, it will not be expected to submit an application package.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                                      5

process and using the methodology developed by the ECB as set out in this
document.
The supervisory assessment of the requests for approval will subsequently be
carried out, followed by the related decisions.
Institutions will then be expected to collect data according to the new definition of
default and – in the second step of the approach – to work on possible adjustments
to their rating systems to take account, where necessary, of: changes in the
definition of default, other regulatory products that are part of the EBA IRB review; 8
and follow-up from previous internal model investigations, such as TRIM missions.
Institutions should also already take into consideration the regulatory technical
standards (“RTS”) on assessment methodology 9 (EBA/RTS/2016/03) and the RTS
on the specification of the nature, severity and duration of an economic downturn 10
and make any necessary adjustments to their rating systems to comply with the
provisions set out in these RTS as soon as they are adopted by the Commission and
have become applicable.
Should the above adjustments to rating systems lead to material model changes,
institutions will need to submit separate applications pursuant to DR 529/2014. It
may therefore be the case that an institution first submits the above application
package for a material model change due to a change in the definition of default, and
subsequently submits a second application package for a material model change
due to adjustments to its rating systems arising from the new definition of default and
other regulatory products.
It is worth highlighting that, according to an EBA Opinion 11, effective implementation
of changes arising from the review of the IRB approach should be finalised by the
end of 2020.
With this in mind, the aim of this document is to provide guidance on the information
that is expected to be produced as part of the first application package requesting
approval of the material change in the definition of default. It is organised as follows.
The remainder of this chapter first clarifies the regulatory framework underlying the
structured self-assessment, then describes in more detail the supervisory process for
addressing the regulatory changes to the definition of default.
8
     EBA Guidelines on PD estimation, LGD estimation and the treatment of defaulted exposures
     (EBA/GL/2017/16), the Regulatory Technical Standards on IRB assessment methodology
     (EBA/RTS/2016/03) and the Regulatory Technical Standards on economic downturn (the work
     on the economic downturn is still under preparation by the EBA, see EBA/CP/2018/07 and
     EBA/CP/2018/08).
9
     Available at:
     https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1525916/Final+Draft+RTS+on+Assessment+Methodolog
     y+for+IRB.pdf/e8373cbc-cc4b-4dd9-83b5-93c9657a39f0
10
     The work on the economic downturn is still under preparation by the EBA, see EBA/CP/2018/07 and
     EBA/CP/2018/08.
11
     Available at:
     https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1359456/EBA-Op-2016-
     01+Opinion+on+IRB+implementation.pdf
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                           6

    Chapter 2 defines the scope of the supervisory process.
    Chapter 3 summarises the content of the application package to be submitted by
    institutions.
    Chapter 4 provides guidance on completing the registry template accompanying this
    document.
    Chapter 5 details the steps for completing the gap analysis template accompanying
    this document.
    Chapters 6 and 7 set out similar guidance for the impact analysis.
    Chapter 8 builds on the results of the analyses described above, setting out the
    details of the action plan to be submitted as part of the application package.
    Chapter 9 goes on to specify requirements for test activities during and on
    completion of changes to the IT infrastructure as part of the implementation of the
    new definition of default, where applicable.
    Chapter 10 describes the monitoring process designed to track the appropriateness
    of institutions’ rating systems following the go-live of the new definition of default.
    Chapter 11 describes the process for frequently asked questions (“FAQ process”)
    that has been set up to support institutions in carrying out their analyses. This
    process channels and answers questions about the templates, the application
    package or the process guidance in this document.
1.2 Regulatory framework
    On 28 September 2016, the EBA published on its website both the draft RTS on the
    materiality threshold for credit obligations past due (under Article 178(6) of the CRR)
    and the Guidelines 12 (under Article 178(7) of the CRR). The draft RTS were adopted
    by the European Commission in the Delegated Regulation, entered into force on the
    twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European
    Union 13. The Guidelines were subject to the “comply or explain” framework in
    accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) 1093/2010 and shall apply from 1
    January 2021.
    In respect of the Guidelines, the ECB has notified the EBA of its intention to comply
    in full with the principles set out in them by 1 January 2021 14.
    For institutions supervised by the SSM, the definition of the level of the materiality
    threshold according to the conditions set out in the Delegated Regulation is currently
    12
        The translation into all EU languages was completed on 18 January 2017.
    13
        See OJ L 32, 6.2.2018, p. 1-5.
    14
        See https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1597103/EBA+GL+2016+07-
        CT+GLs+on+application+of+the+definition+of+default.pdf/8797444b-4aa7-4804-a2be-fd941c941c90.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                       7

    ongoing and will result in the adoption of ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ. The
    Delegated Regulation prescribes the following conditions for setting materiality
    thresholds:
    •     for retail exposures, the absolute component of the threshold should not exceed
          EUR 100 and the relative component should be between 0% and 2.5%;
    •     for non-retail exposures, the absolute component of the threshold should not
          exceed EUR 500 and the relative component should be between 0% and 2.5%;
    •     the relative component of the threshold should be set at 1% unless the
          responsible competent authority assesses that this level does not reflect a
          reasonable level of risk.
    Pursuant to the draft text of the “ECB Regulation exercising a discretion under Article
    178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in relation to the threshold for assessing
    the materiality of credit obligations past due”, the preliminary ECB stance is to set
    the absolute component of the materiality threshold at the maximum levels
    prescribed in the Delegated Regulation, i.e. EUR 100 for retail exposures and
    EUR 500 for non-retail exposures, and the relative component of the materiality
    threshold at the baseline level of 1% for both retail and non-retail exposures. A
    default is deemed to have occurred when both the limits expressed as the absolute
    and relative components are exceeded for 90 consecutive days.
    Article 178(1)(b) of the CRR also gives competent authorities the option to replace
    the 90 days past due criterion with 180 days for exposures secured by residential
    property or SME commercial immovable property in the retail exposure class, as well
    as exposures to public sector entities. The ECB chose, by means of Article 4 of ECB
    Regulation (EU) 2016/445, not to exercise the option provided for in Article 178(1)(b)
    of the CRR, abolishing the 180 days past due criterion for all SSM significant
    institutions from 1 January 2017. ECB Regulation (EU) 2016/445 should therefore be
    taken into account when interpreting and applying the provisions of ECB Regulation
    (EU) YYYY/XYZ and the Guidelines relating to the past due criterion.
1.3 Supervisory process
    The scope of this supervisory process comprises all IRB rating systems for which the
    ECB is the competent authority, including those rating systems for which a joint
    decision process is applicable pursuant to Article 20(1)(a) of the CRR and for which
    applications for permission are to be submitted to the ECB as the consolidating
    supervisor in accordance with Article 20(1) of the CRR. Further details are provided
    in Chapter 2.
    The cornerstone of the supervisory process set up to address the implementation of
    the regulatory changes to the definition of default is the completion by institutions of
    a structured self-assessment consisting of the following elements.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale               8

     (a)  A registry in which institutions record all relevant definitions of default and
          rating systems used within their organisational structure.
     (b)  A gap analysis in which institutions should first carry out a self-assessment
          of their compliance with ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
          with the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines and of necessary
          adjustments to specific procedures and IT systems used in the default
          identification process, and then produce an implementation plan
          comprising an estimated timeline for ensuring compliance. The gap
          analysis is requested at the level of each single requirement and optional
          practice of the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
          conjunction with the Delegated Regulation.
     (c)  An impact analysis in which institutions provide a best estimate of the
          impact of the change in the definition of default on their rating systems,
          portfolio properties, risk parameters, expected loss (EL) amounts and risk
          weighted exposure amounts (RWEA). The impact analysis is requested at
          the level of each individual rating system.
          Since the default data based on the new definition of default are not yet
          available, institutions should assess the impact by carrying out a
          “retrospective simulation”, i.e. by comparing the status of historical
          exposures when simulating the application of the new versus the current
          “old” definition of default, with the possibility of restricting the analysis to a
          limited period of time and, subject to certain conditions, a representative
          sample of exposures. According to the supervisory process, there is no
          mandatory requirement to implement a (real time) parallel run of the old
          and new definition of default in order to complete the impact analysis.
          The impact analysis is to be conducted for those requirements and
          applicable optional practices for which institutions have identified gaps
          between the definition of default currently implemented and a definition of
          default compliant with the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ
          in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation. It therefore complements the
          gap analysis and should be consistent with the information provided in it. It
          is divided into two parts – a qualitative and a quantitative impact analysis.
          The qualitative impact analysis provides an overview of all gaps identified
          and indicates whether a gap is included in the quantitative analysis or
          assessed qualitatively. If a gap can be assessed quantitatively, this should
          be done using the retrospective simulation described above. Institutions
          are strongly encouraged to perform a quantitative impact analysis for as
          many identified gaps as possible. Qualitative impact analysis is required
          exclusively for those requirements and applicable optional practices that
          institutions are not able to include in their quantitative impact analysis.
          They should be regarded as a fall-back option, however, and institutions
          are expected to avoid or minimise their use wherever possible.
          In the case of immaterial rating systems (according to the definition in
          Section 7.1), institutions may be granted a waiver for the quantitative
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale                   9

           impact analysis. In such cases institutions do not need to perform the
           quantitative impact analysis but will still need to provide the other elements
           of the structured self-assessment, including the qualitative impact analysis.
     (d)   An action plan in which institutions consolidate and record all necessary
           changes to be made to their rating systems, IT procedures and processes
           to make them compliant with ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
           conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines in the
           shortest possible period of time, including an estimated timeline for the
           implementation of all changes.
           As actions and timelines may evolve during implementation, the first action
           plan may be considered preliminary. Institutions may amend their
           submission as necessary until the go-live of the new definition(s) of
           default. In this regard, please note that institutions may carry out
           implementation activities before submitting their application (and thus in
           principle while completing the gap and impact analyses). The relevant
           steps and their degree of completion should be reflected appropriately in
           the action plan.
     (e)   Documentation on the review of the IT infrastructure used in the default
           detection process to ensure that a given institution is ready to handle the
           changes in the definition of default by the time of the envisaged go-live.
           When requesting permission to implement changes in the definition of
           default, institutions are expected to have a thorough test concept/testing
           framework in place and should be able to provide a report on the status of
           their testing activities up to that point to demonstrate progress with the
           review of their IT infrastructure.
Overall, the supervisory process comprises the following key elements:
1.   Application package: According to the process, institutions are expected to
     submit a single application requesting approval of the material change in the
     definition(s) of default for all rating systems used under the IRB approach. The
     registry template, gap analysis templates, impact analysis templates, action
     plan template and documentation on the review of the IT infrastructure should
     be part of the application package.
2.   Supervisory review: To ensure consistent and comparable outcomes, the ECB
     will assess all applications using a uniform approach. The assessment will
     include verification of the compliance of the new definition of default to be
     implemented by institutions with ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
     conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines, and examination
     of the appropriateness of the gap analysis, impact analysis and action plan.
3.   Supervisory decision: Assuming that the definition of default is compliant with
     the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the
     Delegated Regulation, several outcomes may follow depending on the
     completeness of the application package submitted by institutions, the
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale             10

     readiness to implement a definition of default compliant with the Guidelines and
     ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation,
     the expected impact in terms of the direction and magnitude of the gaps
     identified and the degree of reliability of the analyses presented. Institutions are
     therefore encouraged to provide a thorough application package containing
     precise gap and impact analyses and a detailed action plan. This will minimise
     the need for possible supervisory measures until a complete adjustment of the
     rating systems has been carried out.
Figure 1: Core elements of the supervisory process
Implementation of the new definition of default - Background and rationale             11

                   2 Scope of the supervisory process
                     This chapter defines the scope of the supervisory process and hence of the
                     structured self-assessment designed to gauge the impact of the changes in the
                     definition(s) of default on institutions’ exposures and ultimately on their requirements
                     in terms of own funds.
                     The self-assessment should only cover exposures for which permission has been
                     granted to use the IRB approach. Any exposures under the Standardised Approach
                     (including exposures for which institutions have been granted permission for
                     permanent partial use in accordance with Article 150 of the CRR) are outside the
                     scope of this process. This also implies that within an organisational structure in
                     which the parent institution uses the Standardised Approach while a subsidiary has
                     been granted permission to use an IRB approach, only the subsidiary falls within the
                     scope of the self-assessment. 15
                     Moreover, only those institutions for which the ECB is the consolidating supervisor
                     referred to in Article 20(1) of the CRR as at 31 December 2017 are expected to
                     analyse whether entities within their scope of prudential consolidation need to carry
                     out the self-assessment. Formally, the scope of this process covers all significant
                     supervised groups (“significant supervised groups”) according to Article 2(22) of ECB
                     Regulation (EU) No 468/2014 (“SSM Framework Regulation”) and all significant
                     supervised entities according to Article 2(16) of the SSM Framework Regulation
                     (“significant supervised entities”) that are not part of a significant supervised group.
“Submitting party”   In this document, a “submitting party” is defined as:
                                   (i)    a significant supervised group, including all subsidiaries within
                                          countries that are SSM members as well as subsidiaries in countries
                                          that are not SSM members, also taking into account countries outside
                                          the European Economic Area (EEA), whose definitions of default and
                                          rating systems are used on a consolidated level; or
                                   (ii)   a significant supervised entity that is not part of a significant
                                          supervised group.
                     Importantly, while this encompasses definitions of default and rating systems of non-
                     EEA subsidiaries used at a consolidated level, the subsidiaries’ approaches and
                     policies used at an individual level (if different) do not fall within the scope of the self-
                     assessment.
                     15
                         Institutions currently applying for initial model approval to use an IRB Approach and those planning a
                         roll-out in the near future should liaise with their respective JST for a case-by-case assessment of their
                         particular situation in respect of this process.
                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Scope of the supervisory process                         12

Submission &   The supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within a submitting party, if
reference date
               it is a significant supervised group, or the submitting party itself if it is not part of a
               significant group, is asked to submit one application package encompassing all
               rating systems to request approval to implement the new definition(s) of default for
               itself and all its relevant subsidiaries. For reference, Figure 2 provides a stylised
               example of an organisational structure and indicates which entities fall within the
               scope of the process.
               The general reference date for all information to be provided (“reference date”) shall
               be 31 December 2017, unless stated otherwise; any comparisons requested in this
               document should be conducted relative to the (approved) definition of default
               implemented for the purposes of the IRB approach on this reference date.
               Figure 2: Stylised example of the scope of the process
               Implementation of the new definition of default - Scope of the supervisory process          13

                       3                         Content of the application package
                                                 DR 529/2014 prescribes that changes in the definition of default always constitute a
                                                 material change in a given rating system 16 and defines the general content of the
                                                 application package to be submitted by each submitting party (Article 8 of DR
                                                 529/2014).
Figure 3: Content of Article 8 of DR 529/2014 relating to the application package
                              Article 8 of DR 529/2014                                                                   Application package
   Description of the extension or change, its rationale and objective                       Gap analysis templates
   Implementation date                                                                       Action plan
   Scope of application affected by the model extension or change, with
                                                                                             Registry template
   volume characteristics
                                                                                             - Technical and process documents relating to the definition of default
                                                                                               policies
   Technical and process document(s)
                                                                                             - Summary of the main changes to the IT implementation
                                                                                             - List of all documents affected by the change in the definition of default
   Reports of the institution’s independent review or validation                             Clearance from the institution’s internal audit function
   Confirmation that the extension or change has been approved
   through the institution’s approval processes by the competent bodies                      Confirmation of approval by the relevant bodies
   and date of approval
   Quantitative impact of the change or extension on the risk-weighted
                                                                                             Qualitative and quantitative impact analysis templates
   exposure amounts or own funds requirements
   Records of the institution’s current and previous version number of
                                                                                             Registry template
   internal models which are subject to approval
Due to its fundamental importance for the accuracy, consistency, and completeness of the data underlying model development, institutions are asked to submit a quantitative impact
analysis for the change in the definition of default triggered by ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines (cf. Article 8(1)(g) of
DR 529/2014). The envisaged quantitative impact analysis is in line with Article 3(2) of DR 529/2014.
                                                 In line with these requirements (cf. Figure 3), institutions are asked to place
                                                 particular emphasis on providing the following elements:
                                                 •         confirmation that the change(s) has (have) gone through the institution’s
                                                           approval processes and has (have) been approved by the relevant
                                                           management bodies in accordance with Article 189(1) of the CRR;
                                                 •         the final draft of the updated technical and process documents on the definition
                                                           of default policies, namely the definition of default internal policy 17, the default
                                                           detection process and the return to non-defaulted status process;
                                                 •         presentation or summary of the main changes to the IT implementation;
                                                 •         list of all documents affected by the change in the definition of default, for
                                                           example policies on the credit-granting process and other documents proving
                                                           the use of the models in the institution’s processes (i.e. “use test” in accordance
                                                           with Article 144(1)(b) of the CRR), clearly distinguishing between those that
                                                 16
                                                         Article 4(1)(b) in conjunction with Annex I, Part II, Section 1, Paragraph 3 of DR 529/2014.
                                                 17
                                                         In respect of internal policy documentation, the submission is expected to comprise the final draft
                                                         cleared by institutions’ internal audit functions (see below).
                                                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Content of the application package                                             14

      have already been updated and those that will be updated at a later date as
      described in the action plan.
•     completed application form as attached to this document;
•     completed registry template containing a list of all definitions of default and all
      rating systems;
•     completed set of gap analysis templates covering all definitions of default;
•     completed set of qualitative and quantitative impact analysis templates covering
      all rating systems for which both templates are necessary in accordance with
      Chapter 7;
•     comprehensive action plan 18 for implementing the new definition(s) of default,
      which should generally include:
      •     a description of all changes to be made, based on what is currently
            implemented, from both a process and technical point of view;
      •     a reference to the process and technical documentation that reflects the
            changes;
      •     the expected implementation date(s), also taking into account planned
            staff training, additional planned validation, audit tasks, etc.;
•     clearance from the institution’s internal audit function in the form of a report on
      the appropriateness and completeness of the application package. The
      expectation is that each application package will go through an independent
      review, culminating in an independent opinion provided by the institution’s
      internal audit function and documented in a report, which should as a minimum
      confirm:
      •     the completeness of the application package, including confirmation that it
            includes the final, internal audit-approved versions of all relevant
            documentation;
      •     approval of the changes by all relevant bodies;
      •     the accuracy and completeness of the registry and gap templates (in terms
            of coverage of all relevant definitions of default and rating systems,
            correctness of the RWEA figures, etc.);
      •     the accuracy and completeness of the results of the qualitative and
            quantitative impact analyses.
Institutions may provide additional documentation and information to supplement that
listed above where this is deemed appropriate in order to provide the relevant JST
with a comprehensive understanding of the issues in question.
18
    The action plan may be revised during the course of the approval process.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Content of the application package     15

Institutions should also note the following when completing the templates:
•     only make entries in fields with yellow highlighting;
•     bear in mind that to obtain consistent and comparable inputs from all
      institutions, some input fields expect institutions to select from a list of pre-
      defined answers while others require free-text entries;
•     do not change (standardised) identifiers unless otherwise stated;
•     respect all automated validation rules and protections – inconsistent inputs may
      be treated as incomplete at the sole discretion of the ECB;
•     provide inputs “from left to right”, as dropdown menu values may depend on
      answers to previous questions.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Content of the application package    16

4   Registry
    The registry of definitions of default and rating systems serves as a central reference
    point for the gap and impact analyses. Its purpose is to collect general information on
    the submitting party that is relevant across all self-assessments and to link the
    definitions of default and rating systems in a traceable manner across the analyses
    without undue replication of details.
    A dedicated template (“registry template”) is provided as an attachment to this
    document. Institutions are asked to complete the registry template using the
    guidance provided below and include it in the documentation submitted as part of the
    application package.
    This chapter provides details on the information that is expected to be produced for
    the registry and offers guidance on completing the registry template.
4.1 General guidance
    As a general rule, where the submitting party is a significant supervised group the
    template should be completed by the supervised entity at the highest level of
    consolidation within that group. In other words, each submitting party is expected to
    submit one template that includes the details for all relevant subsidiaries. It should
    comprise a complete list of the definitions of default used to comply with Article 178
    of the CRR for all types of exposures treated under the IRB approach which fall
    within the scope outlined in Chapter 2, together with a complete list of the rating
    systems 19 applied within the submitting party’s organisational structure, i.e. including
    all stand-alone definitions of default and/or rating systems applied by subsidiaries
    within the scope of the self-assessment.
    For the purposes of completing the registry and all subsequent templates, two rating
    systems are considered to have the same definition of default if they share a single
    internal guideline on how to identify defaults. This means that the same rules,
    including the same materiality threshold, are considered for counting of days past
    due, the same triggers are considered as indications of unlikeliness to pay and the
    same conditions apply for the return to non-defaulted status. Multiple rating systems
    may share the same default definition or, conversely, a single rating system may be
    19
        It is expected that institutions will refer to the register of rating systems defined in the upcoming EU
        Delegated Regulation implementing Article 33 of the Final Draft Regulatory Technical Standards (RTS)
        on the specification of the assessment methodology for competent authorities regarding compliance of
        an institution with the requirements to use the IRB Approach in accordance with Articles 144(2), 173(3)
        and 180(3)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, covering the detailed scope of the rating system,
        specifying which types of exposures are rated by each rating system.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                   17

          linked to multiple definitions of default 20. For a single definition of default, the
          expectation is that an explicit answer can be provided to the question of whether or
          not it already complies with a certain requirement (or optional practice where
          applicable) for each provision of ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with
          the Delegated Regulation or the Guidelines (as if already applicable). Where, in
          exceptional cases, institutions cannot (yet) meet such an expectation, they should
          explain in full in what respect and for what reason(s) such an expectation cannot be
          met in the free-text comments field of Sheet “General Information” (cf. Section 4.2.1
          below).
Example 1 Institution A has a distinct rating system, R1, for retail IRBA exposures and two rating
          systems, R2 and R3, for non-retail IRBA exposures. In addition, a fourth rating
          system, R4, is used solely for management purposes on a portfolio of exposures that
          are treated under the Standardised Approach (cf. Figure 4). Rating system R3 is
          applied by a subsidiary, but it applies the same definition of default as the group
          head for rating system R2.
          Figure 4: Sample structure of definitions of default within a group
                                                             Institution A
                       Rating                     Rating                                                    Rating
                     system R1                 system R2               Subsidiary A1                      system R4
                       (retail)                (non-retail)                                                  (SA)
             Definition of default DoD1                                     Rating                Definition of default DoD3
                                                                          system R3
                                                                          (non-retail)
                                         Definition of default DoD2
          In this example, rating systems R2 and R3 share a unique definition of default
          (DoD2). In all templates, this circumstance should be handled by including DoD2 as
          one distinct definition of default attached to the supervised entity at the highest level
          of consolidation within the submitting party. DoD3 is outside the scope of any of the
          analyses, as it does not concern IRBA portfolios and should therefore not be
          included in the registry template.
          All registry templates should be submitted using the following naming convention:
          "registry_template_[LEICode].xlsx", where [LEICode] denotes the Legal Entity
          Identifier (LEI) code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
          20
               Such a case is mentioned in par. 85 of the Guidelines. A concrete example can be the following: a
               group of homogeneously managed exposures covers two jurisdictions with slightly different materiality
               thresholds and so with different definitions of default. These differences are not enough to justify the
               development of distinct rating systems and therefore a unique rating system, associated to two
               definitions of default, is developed.
          Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                       18

      within the submitting party (this entry should be identical for all templates submitted
      by a given submitting party).
4.2   Guidance on the template
      The registry template is an Excel workbook comprising a total of four sheets:
      •     General Information;
      •     List of definitions of default;
      •     List of rating systems;
      •     Guidance.
      Sheet “General Information” asks for a range of general inputs. For the purposes of
      transparency and traceability, the definitions of default and rating systems are listed
      in separate sheets entitled Sheet “List of definitions of default” and Sheet “List of
      rating systems” respectively. Sheet “Guidance” contains no input fields but provides
      information on how to complete the other sheets within the template. Detailed
      guidance on how to complete each input field is provided in the following
      subsections.
4.2.1 Sheet “General Information”
      In Sheet “General Information”, institutions are expected to provide a set of basic
      reference data – name, contact information, LEI code and country code – for the
      supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
      Institutions should also indicate whether they intend to adjust the number of
      definitions of default during the course of implementing ECB Regulation (EU)
      YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and the Guidelines
      (optional input). More precisely, they should record the expected (total) number of
      definitions of default to be applied within the relevant organisational structure of the
      submitting party once all amendments have been completed.
      In addition to the mandatory fields mentioned above, institutions may provide free-
      text comments at the bottom of the sheet.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                             19

      Figure 5: Registry template – Sheet “General information”
                                                       Registry Template - General Information
                                                                                                Template Version: 1.01
      Country: (two letter ISO code)
      Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
      within the submitting party:
      LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
      within the submitting party:
      Name of the contact person at the institution:
      Telephone number of the contact person at the institution:
      E-mail of the contact person at the institution:
      How many different DoDs will you use after the regulatory
      review for types of exposures treated under IRBA?
                                           General / additional comments to the answers provided herein
4.2.2 Sheet “List of definitions of default”
      In Sheet “List of definitions of default”, the supervised entity at the highest level of
      consolidation is expected to compile a list of all definitions of default applied within
      the organisational structure of the submitting party as at the reference date,
      providing the following information in each case:
      •         a description of the scope of each definition of default, i.e. in which entities and
                for which IRBA exposure classes (as laid down in Article 147 of the CRR) the
                definition of default is used;
      •         the general exposure type (i.e. retail vs non-retail) to which the definition of
                default applies;
      •         the name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation applying
                the definition of default;
      •         the LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
                applying the definition of default;
      •         the jurisdictions relevant for the exposures to which the new definition of default
                is applied;
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                       20

                                      •               the name of the gap analysis template submitted for the definition of default.
                                      Crucially, institutions must not – for any reason – change the (standardised)
                                      identifiers provided in the first column of the template.
                                      Figure 6: Registry template – Sheet “List of definitions of default”
                                                            Description of the scope to which each definition of default is applied:              Name of the supervised         LEI code of the supervised
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jurisdictions relevant for the
                                                            in which entities and for which IRBA exposure classes (i.e. exposure General exposure entity at the highest level of entity at the highest level of                                        Name of the gap analysis template
                                       ID of the definition                                                                                                                                                     exposures to which the new
                                                            classes as laid down in Article 147 of the CRR) the definition of default type        consolidation applying the     consolidation applying the                                            submitted
                                            of default                                                                                                                                                          definition of default is to be applied
                                                            is used?                                                                              definition of default          definition of default
                                                                                               010                                         020                  030                            040                                050                                   060
                                              DOD1
                                              DOD2
                                              DOD3
                                              DOD4
                                              DOD5
                                              DOD6
                                              DOD7
                                              DOD8
                                              DOD9
                                             DOD10
                                             DOD11
                                             DOD12
                                             DOD13
                                             DOD14
                                             DOD15
                                             DOD16
                                             DOD17
                                             DOD18
                                             DOD19
                                             DOD20
                                             DOD21
Input 1: Description of the scope to  The first input field (column identifier 010) is for a free-text entry of answers to the
which each definition of default is
applied: in which entities and for    following questions for each definition of default as at the reference date:
which IRBA exposure classes
(i.e. exposure classes as laid down
                                      •               In which entities is the definition of default used (the name of the entity is
in Article 147 of the CRR) is the
definition of default used?                           sufficient)?
                                      •               For which IRBA exposure classes (as per Article 147 of the CRR) is the
                                                      definition of default used?
                                      If considered useful for subsequent analyses, institutions may also supply internal
                                      identifiers for their definition(s) of default.
Input 2: General exposure type        For the second input field (column identifier 020), institutions may choose from three
                                      possible answers in a dropdown menu:
                                      •               “Retail”;
                                      •               “Non-retail”;
                                      •               “Both retail and non-retail”.
                                      “Retail” should be selected if the given definition of default applies only and
                                      exclusively to retail exposures (i.e. exposures assigned to the retail exposure class
                                      in accordance with Article 147(2)(d) of the CRR). “Non-retail” should be selected if
                                      the definition of default applies only and exclusively to non-retail exposures (i.e.
                                      exposures assigned to the exposure classes specified in Article 147(2)(a), (b), (c)
                                      and/or (e) of the CRR).
                                      “Both retail and non-retail” should otherwise be selected to indicate that the definition
                                      of default covers a mix of retail and non-retail exposures.
Input 3: Name of the supervised       The third input field (column identifier 030) is for a free-text entry of the name of the
entity at the highest level of
consolidation applying the definition supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party’s
of default
                                      Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                                                                                                                                                        21

                                       organisational structure that applies the given definition of default to IRBA
                                       exposures.
                                       In the example depicted in Panel (a) of Figure 7, institutions would reference the
                                       head of the significant supervisory group for DoD1 and the relevant subsidiary at
                                       “Level 2” for DoD2. Similarly, in the example depicted in Panel (b), institutions would
                                       reference the head of the significant supervisory group for DoD1, the subsidiary at
                                       “Level 2” for DoD2, and the subsidiary at “Level 1” for DoD3.
                                       Figure 7: Stylised examples of the treatment of subsidiaries
                                       (a) Separate treatment of DoD2 at subsidiary level
                                                         DoD 1                      Head of significant supervisory group
                                                                                    within SSM
                                                  DoD 1         DoD 1               Subsidiaries (“Level 1”)
                                          DoD 1          DoD 2        DoD 1         Subsidiaries (“Level 2”)
                                       (b) Separate treatment of DoD2 and DoD3 at subsidiary level
                                                         DoD 1                      Head of significant supervisory group
                                                                                    within SSM
                                                  DoD 1         DoD 3               Subsidiaries (“Level 1”)
                                          DoD 1          DoD 2        DoD 3         Subsidiaries (“Level 2”)
Input 4: LEI code of the supervised    Based on the entry in the column with identifier 030, institutions should provide, in
entity at the highest level of
consolidation applying the definition  the column with identifier 040, the LEI code 21 of the supervised entity at the highest
of default                             level of consolidation within the submitting party’s organisational structure that
                                       applies the given definition of default.
Input 5: Jurisdictions relevant for    In the column with identifier 050, institutions may choose from two possible answers
the exposures to which the new
definition of default is to be applied in a dropdown menu:
                                       •       “SSM jurisdiction”;
                                       •       “SSM and other jurisdictions”.
                                       The input seeks to establish the supervisory regime to which a given definition of
                                       default is subject, since this might affect the implementation of the new regulatory
                                       requirements.
                                       21
                                            According to the Global Legal Entity Identifier Foundation, GLEIF: https://www.gleif.org.
                                       Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                     22

                                  “SSM jurisdiction” should be selected if the given definition of default falls solely
                                  under the SSM supervisory regime (i.e. the significant supervised entity or all entities
                                  that are part of a significant supervised group is/are established in one or more
                                  Member States participating in the SSM).
                                  Conversely, if the definition of default is (potentially) also subject to national
                                  requirements set by local non-SSM authorities, institutions should select “SSM and
                                  other jurisdictions”.
Input 6: Name of the gap analysis To facilitate cross-referencing with the results of the gap analysis, the column with
template submitted
                                  identifier 060 should be completed with the full name of the gap analysis template
                                  submitted for the given definition of default.
                    4.2.3         Sheet “List of rating systems”
                                  The information to be provided in Sheet “List of rating systems” is broadly parallel to
                                  that requested in Sheet “List of definitions of default”. In particular, institutions are
                                  expected to compile a list of all rating systems applied within their organisational
                                  structure for the purpose of determining own funds requirements for credit risk in
                                  accordance with the IRBA, by providing the following information as at the reference
                                  date:
                                  •     the name of the rating system (in accordance with the definition in point (1) of
                                        Article 142(1) of the CRR) as used within the institution for which a material
                                        change in the definition of default is being notified;
                                  •     a description of the scope of exposures to which each rating system is applied,
                                        i.e. in which entities and for which IRBA exposure classes (as laid down in
                                        Article 147 of the CRR) the rating system is used;
                                  •     the ID(s) of the definition(s) of default applied for the rating system;
                                  •     the general exposure type (retail vs non-retail) to which the rating system
                                        applies;
                                  •     the type of exposures as defined in point (2) of Article 142(1) of the CRR that
                                        form the range of application of the rating system in accordance with the
                                        second sub-paragraph of Article 143(3) of the CRR;
                                  •     whether or not the institution has permission to use its own estimates for LGD in
                                        accordance with Article 143(2) of the CRR;
                                  •     whether or not the institution has permission to use its own estimates for the
                                        credit conversion factor (“CCF”) in accordance with Article 143(2) of the CRR;
                                  •     the name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation applying
                                        the definition of default;
                                  •     the LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
                                        applying the definition of default;
                                  Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                23

                                       •                    the RWEA covered by this rating system (in EUR million);
                                       •                    the name of the qualitative impact analysis template submitted for the rating
                                                            system;
                                       •                    whether the institution has been granted a waiver for the quantitative impact
                                                            analysis in accordance with the rules set out in Section 7.1;
                                       •                    where a waiver has been granted, the estimated RWEA (in EUR million) if the
                                                            new definition of default is applied.
                                       Figure 8: Registry template – Sheet “List of rating systems”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Name of the supervised                                                                                                                    If a waiver has been granted,
                                                                            Description of the scope of exposures to which each rating system is ID(s) of the                                                                                                                       LEI code of the supervised Amount of RWEA                                                Has a waiver been
                                                                                                                                                                                      Type of exposures that build Does the institution Does the institution entity at the highest                                                                                                                     what is the estimated overall
                                                         Name of the rating applied: in which entities and for which IRBA exposure classes (i.e. definition(s) of    General exposure                                                                                               entity at the highest level of covered by this   Name of the qualitative impact analysis requested and granted for
                                        ID of the rating                                                                                                                              the range of application of  use own estimates of use own estimates of level of consolidation                                                                                                                    amount of RWEA (in EUR
                                                         system             exposure classes as laid down in Article 147 of the CRR) the rating  default applied for type                                                                                                           consolidation applying the     rating system (in template submitted                      the quantitative impact
                                            system                                                                                                                                    the rating system            LGD?                 CCF?                 applying the rating                                                                                                                       million) if the new definition
                                                                            system is used?                                                      the rating system                                                                                                                  rating system                  EUR million)                                              analysis?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             system                                                                                                                                    of default is applied?
                                                                 010                                           020                                        030               040                    050                       060                  070                    080                      090                       100                        110                               120                          130
                                              RS1
                                              RS2
                                              RS3
                                              RS4
                                              RS5
                                              RS6
                                              RS7
                                              RS8
                                              RS9
                                             RS10
                                             RS11
                                             RS12
                                             RS13
                                             RS14
                                             RS15
                                             RS16
                                             RS17
                                             RS18
                                             RS19
                                             RS20
                                             RS21
Input 1: Name of the rating system     In the column with identifier 010, institutions should provide the name of the rating
                                       system. This should be the same name that has been or would normally be used to
                                       notify a material change to the ECB.
Input 2: Description of the scope of   The column with identifier 020 is for a free-text entry of answers to the following
exposures to which each rating
system is applied: in which entities   questions for each rating system as at the reference date:
and for which IRBA exposure
classes (i.e. exposure classes as
                                       •                    In which entities is the rating system used (the name of the entity is sufficient)?
laid down in Article 147 of the CRR)
is the rating system used?
                                       •                    For which IRBA exposure classes (as per Article 147 of the CRR) is the
                                                            definition of default used?
                                       If considered useful for subsequent analyses, institutions may also supply internal
                                       identifiers for their rating systems.
Input 3: ID(s) of the definition(s) of In the column with identifier 030, institutions are asked to provide a cross-reference
default applied for the rating system
                                       to the definition(s) of default (i.e. reference to the column value “ID of the definition of
                                       default”) used for the rating system (free-text entry). Should a given rating system be
                                       associated with more than one definition of default, institutions should provide a
                                       comma-separated list of the identifiers of the relevant definitions of default as
                                       provided in the first column of Sheet “List of definitions of default”.
Input 4: General exposure type         In the column with identifier 040, institutions may choose from three possible
                                       answers in a dropdown menu:
                                       •                    “Retail”;
                                       •                    “Non-retail”;
                                       •                    “Both retail and non-retail”.
                                       Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24

                                      “Retail” should be selected if the given rating system applies only and exclusively to
                                      retail exposures (i.e. exposures assigned to the retail exposure class in accordance
                                      with Article 147(2)(d) of the CRR). “Non-retail” should be selected if the rating system
                                      applies only and exclusively to non-retail exposures (i.e. exposures assigned to the
                                      exposure classes specified in Article 147(2)(a), (b), (c) and/or (e) of the CRR). “Both
                                      retail and non-retail” should otherwise be selected to indicate that the rating system
                                      covers a mix of retail and non-retail exposures.
Input 5: Type of exposures that       To provide a more detailed description of the rating system’s scope, institutions are
build the range of application of the
rating system                         expected to enter in the column with identifier 050 the type of exposures as defined
                                      in point (2) of Article 142(1) of the CRR that build the range of application of the
                                      rating system in accordance with the second sub-paragraph of Article 143(3) of the
                                      CRR. This column is for free-text entries.
Input 6: Does the institution use     In the column with identifier 060, institutions should indicate whether or not they have
own estimates of LGD?
                                      permission to use own estimates of LGD for the given rating system. Institutions may
                                      choose from three possible answers in a dropdown menu:
                                      •     “Yes, for the entire rating system.”;
                                      •     “Yes, for some obligors within the rating system.”;
                                      •     “No, own estimates are not used.”.
                                      “Yes, for the entire rating system.” should be selected if own estimates of LGD are
                                      used for all obligors in the range of application of the rating system. If own estimates
                                      of LGD are not used for any of the obligors, “No, own estimates are not used.”
                                      should be selected. In all other cases, “Yes, for some obligors within the rating
                                      system.” should be selected to indicate that a mix of own estimates and regulatory
                                      values of LGD is applied to the rating system.
Input 7: Does the institution use     In the column with identifier 070, institutions should indicate whether or not they have
own estimates of CCF?
                                      permission to use own estimates of CCF for the given rating system. Institutions may
                                      choose from three possible answers in a dropdown menu:
                                      •     “Yes, for the entire rating system.”;
                                      •     “Yes, for some obligors within the rating system.”;
                                      •     “No, own estimates are not used.”.
                                      "Yes, for the entire rating system." should be selected if own estimates of CCF are
                                      used for all obligors in the range of application of the rating system. If own estimates
                                      of CCF are not used for any of the obligors, “No, own estimates are not used.”
                                      should be selected. In all other cases, “Yes, for some obligors within the rating
                                      system.” should be selected to indicate that a mix of own estimates and regulatory
                                      values of CCF is applied to the rating system.
Input 8: Name of the supervised       The column with identifier 080 is for a free-text entry of the name of the supervised
entity at the highest level of
consolidation applying the rating     entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party’s organisational
system
                                      Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                             25

                                    structure that applies the given rating system. The named entity should be the
                                    hierarchically highest entity using a given distinct rating system.
Input 9: LEI code of the supervised Based on the entry in the column with identifier 080, institutions should provide, in
entity at the highest level of
consolidation applying the rating   the column with identifier 090, the LEI code 22 of the supervised entity at the highest
system                              level of consolidation within the submitting party’s organisational structure that
                                    applies the given rating system.
Input 10: Amount of RWEA covered    In the column with identifier 100, institutions should provide the (total) RWEA
by this rating system (in EUR
million)                            covered by the given rating system (in EUR million) observed on the reference date.
Input 11: Name of the qualitative   To facilitate cross-referencing with the results of the qualitative impact analysis, the
impact analysis template submitted
                                    full name of the qualitative impact analysis template submitted for the relevant rating
                                    system should be entered in the column with identifier 110.
                                    A cross-reference to the quantitative impact analysis template is not necessary, as all
                                    rating systems will be analysed in the same template.
Input 12: Has a waiver been         Institutions may request a waiver for certain rating systems with limited materiality in
requested and granted for the
quantitative impact analysis?       accordance with the rules set out in Section 7.1. Institutions should highlight these
                                    rating systems in the 12th input column (identifier 120). Institutions may choose from
                                    two possible answers in a dropdown menu:
                                    •      “No, a waiver has not been requested or granted.”;
                                    •      “Yes, a waiver has been requested and granted.”.
                                    While the first option is the default answer, institutions should choose the second
                                    option if they requested and were granted a waiver for the given rating system
                                    following consultation with the responsible JST (please refer to Section 7.1 for further
                                    details on the relevant process) before submitting the application package.
Input 13: If a waiver has been      In the column with identifier 130, institutions should provide the estimated (total)
granted, what is the estimated
overall amount of RWEA (in EUR      RWEA covered by the given rating system (in EUR million) when applying the new
million) if the new definition of   definition of default. This information only needs to be provided for those rating
default is applied?
                                    systems for which a waiver has been requested from and granted by the responsible
                                    JST in accordance with the rules set out in Section 7.1. 23
                                    The RWEA estimate should be evaluated on the portfolio observed on the reference
                                    date and should be obtained using reliable methods in accordance with Article 3(2)
                                    of DR 529/2014. Institutions are asked to explain the methods they used in the field
                                    labelled “General / additional comments to the answers provided herein” in Sheet
                                    “General Information”.
                                    22
                                         According to the Global Legal Entity Identifier Foundation, GLEIF: https://www.gleif.org.
                                    23
                                         Please note that this estimate corresponds to the simulation expected in “Step 2” of the retrospective
                                         simulation expected as part of the quantitative analysis, which will be described later in Section 7.2.
                                    Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                                                   26

4.2.4 Sheet “Guidance”
      Sheet "Guidance" contains explanations on how to complete the template. The
      information presented in the sheet is a summary of the guidance offered in this
      document.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Registry                      27

5   Gap analysis
    The gap analysis serves as a structured self-assessment of an institution and is one
    of the key mandatory elements of the documentation to be submitted with the
    application. The self-assessment identifies all gaps between the current definition of
    default (as provided in the registry template, cf. Chapter 4) and the requirements and
    optional practices to be introduced in accordance with the Guidelines and ECB
    Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation, and
    describes how to remedy them. To this end, it is carried out using a dedicated
    template (“gap template”), which is attached to this document and comprises a list of
    questions designed to identify discrepancies with the future requirements and
    optional practices set out in the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
    conjunction with the Delegated Regulation. The gap template also requests insights
    on the steps to be taken to achieve compliance with the regulatory requirements and
    selected optional practices and with the timelines envisaged.
    The aim of this chapter is to provide guidance on the information to be provided as
    part of the gap analysis and the template that institutions are expected to complete
    as part of their application for permission to apply the material changes in the
    definition of default within their rating systems.
5.1 General guidance
    As a general rule, the gap template should be completed by the supervised entity at
    the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party (if it is a significant
    supervised group). If an institution uses more than one definition of default, it may be
    necessary to prepare and submit more than one template.
    As the materiality threshold set by the ECB in accordance with the Delegated
    Regulation (cf. ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ) stipulates different materiality
    thresholds for retail and non-retail exposures, and Chapter 9 of the Guidelines
    relates exclusively to retail exposures, the gap analysis needs to differentiate
    between retail exposures assigned to the retail exposure class in accordance with
    Article 147(2)(d) of the CRR (Sheets “T1” to “T3” in the template) and non-retail
    exposures assigned to the exposure classes specified in Article 147(2)(a), (b), (c)
    and/or (e) of the CRR (Sheets “T4” to “T6” in the template).
    For convenience, the responses for a definition of default for retail exposures and a
    (separate) definition of default for non-retail exposures may be combined into a
    single template. If institutions choose to do this, they are asked to apply the following
    rules:
    •     The definitions of default assessed within a given template should be specific to
          the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting
          party that applies the given definitions of default.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                         28

          •     If a single definition of default is applied for both retail and non-retail exposures,
                it should be assessed with respect to both general exposure types separately,
                i.e. Sheets “T1” to “T6” should be completed even though the self-assessment
                relates to a single definition of default.
          •     If a definition of default is applied to (either) retail or non-retail exposures only,
                the self-assessment should be limited to the particular general exposure type,
                i.e. only Sheets “T1” to “T3” or Sheets “T4” to “T6” respectively need to be
                completed.
          •     If an institution applies different definitions of default for retail and non-retail
                exposures and they are used at the same level of consolidation, the different
                definitions may be assessed in the same gap template. If there is more than
                one distinct definition of default for retail and/or non-retail portfolios, however,
                institutions should use several gap templates.
          •     Definitions of default that are outside the scope of the process 24 will not be
                considered.
          The following examples illustrate the approach to be taken in each of these
          instances.
Example 2 In the situation set out in Example 1 (cf. Section 4.1), retail and non-retail definitions
          of default can be grouped into a single gap template as there are only two relevant
          definitions of default. The gaps identified for DoD1 in R1, should be entered in the
          “retail” sheets of the template. The gaps identified for DoD2 in R2 and R3,
          meanwhile, should be entered in the “non-retail” sheets.
Example 3 Institution B applies five different definitions of default within its group structure.
          Rating systems R1, R2 and R3 are applied at the parent institution, each one
          featuring a distinct definition of default. Subsidiary B1, which applies its own
          definition of default, only uses rating system R4 to rate non-retail IRBA exposures,
          while subsidiary B2, which also applies its own definition of default, only rates retail
          IRBA exposures using rating system R5.
          In this example (cf. Figure 9), the group may complete four or five different gap
          templates. As they are applied at the same level of consolidation, the definitions of
          default for the retail exposures in R1 and the non-retail exposures in R3 may be
          included in the same gap template. The definition of default applied for R2 is handled
          in a separate template, with the sheets for non-retail exposures left blank. 25 Two
          different gap templates are completed for subsidiaries B1 and B2, since the relevant
          definitions of default cannot be consolidated into a higher-level institution and
          24
              As set out in Chapter 2, the following definitions of default are out of scope: (1) definitions solely
              applied by institutions that are not within the scope of the process; (2) definitions solely applied to types
              of exposures for which permission to use rating systems in accordance with Article 143 (2) of the CRR
              has not been granted as at the reference date; and (3) definitions solely applied to exposures for which
              permanent partial use has been granted in accordance with Article 150 of the CRR.
          25
              Please note that the institution could also have chosen to combine the definitions of default for R2 and
              R3 into the same template, leaving the definition for R1 separate.
          Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                                                29

              therefore cannot be combined into a single template. The retail and non-retail sheets
              respectively are left empty in the templates for the subsidiaries.
              Figure 9: Sample structure of definitions of default within a group
                                                                             Institution B
                          Rating                     Rating                    Rating
                        system R1                  system R2                system R3             Subsidiary B1              Subsidiary B2
                          (retail)                   (retail)               (non-retail)
                Definition of default DoD1 Definition of default DoD2 Definition of default DoD3
                                                                                                          Rating                     Rating
                                                                                                        system R4                  system R5
                                                                                                       (non-retail)                  (retail)
                                                                                                 Definition of default DoD4 Definition of default DoD5
Example 4     Institution C has two rating systems, R1 and R2, for large corporates and corporate
              SME respectively. While rating system R1 uses external rating data to identify
              defaults (i.e. a default is recorded if an external rating grade falls below “substantial
              risks”), no such default trigger is applied to rating system R2. In this case the
              definitions of default are considered to be different, and Institution C therefore needs
              to provide a separate gap template for each of the two non-retail definitions of
              default.
Example 5     Institution D has two rating systems, R1 and R2, for large corporates and retail
              exposures respectively. While R1 is associated with a single definition of default
              DoD1, R2 is associated with two definitions of default – DoD2 and DoD3. Institution
              D needs to provide gap analyses for all three definitions of default. As in Example 2
              above, the institution may combine DoD1 with one of the retail definitions of default
              and thus only provide two templates.
              All gap templates should be submitted using the following naming convention:
              “gap_template_[LEICode]_[NrTemplate].xlsx”, where:
              •         [LEICode] denotes the LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of
                        consolidation within the submitting party;
              •         [NrTemplate] is a consecutive number provided for each gap template, e.g. 1 for
                        the first template, 2 for the second template, and n for the nth template.
          5.2 Guidance on the template
              The gap template is an Excel workbook comprising a total of nine sheets:
              •         General Information
              •         Index
              Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                                                                        30

      •     Template T1 (Requirements set forth in regulatory technical standards (retail
            exposures))
      •     Template T2 (Requirements set forth in guidelines (retail exposures))
      •     Template T3 (Optional practices set forth in guidelines (retail exposures))
      •     Template T4 (Requirements set forth in regulatory technical standards (non-
            retail exposures))
      •     Template T5 (Requirements set forth in guidelines (non-retail exposures))
      •     Template T6 (Optional practices set forth in guidelines (non-retail exposures))
      •     Guidance
      Sheet “General Information” comprises the identifier of the supervised entity at the
      highest level of consolidation using the definition(s) of default assessed in the
      template together with the relevant definitions of default, while Sheets “T1” to “T6”
      contain all requirements and optional practices for which the institution needs to
      explain its compliance as at the reference date. To structure the content, each sheet
      (only) deals with one specific regulatory product – i.e. either the rules based on ECB
      Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation or the rules
      based on the Guidelines – and is concerned with either requirements or optional
      practices. “Requirements” cover mandatory rules that all institutions must apply,
      whereas “Optional practices” cover the practices described in the Guidelines that
      institutions may but are not required to apply. The remaining sheets do not have
      input fields and are for information purposes only. Detailed guidance on how to
      complete the input fields is provided below.
      Sheets “T1” to “T6” each contain automatic counters that keep track of the number of
      missing answers. Any counter with a value above zero is highlighted in red. Once all
      answers have been provided, the highlighting automatically changes to green.
      Institutions should ensure that all necessary answers are provided, i.e. that none of
      the counters are left with a value above zero.
5.2.1 Sheet “General Information”
      In Sheet “General Information”, institutions should provide information on the scope
      of the gap analysis as applicable within their specific organisational structures. This
      general information should be provided for the entity (at the highest level of
      consolidation) within the organisational structure of the submitting party that applies
      the given definition(s) of default as described in Chapter 2 and Section 5.1. However,
      each gap template should also include a reference to the supervised entity at the
      highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                        31

          Figure 10: Gap analysis template – Sheet “General information”
                                                         Definition of Default Gap Analysis - General Information
                                                                                                                   Template Version: 1.01
          Country: (two letter ISO code)
          Institution LEI code:
          Name of institution:
          Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
          submitting party (if different):
          LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
          submitting party (if different):
          ID of the definition of default covered by templates T1-T3 (retail):
          ID of the definition of default covered by templates T4-T6 (non-retail):
                                                       General / additional comments to the answers provided herein
          Each submitting party should provide a set of basic reference data (LEI code and
          country code) for the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within its
          organisational structure that applies the definition(s) of default assessed in the
          template. To link the data provided in Sheets “T1” to “T6”, institutions are also
          expected to provide the “ID of the definition of default covered by templates T1-T3
          (retail)” and the “ID of the definition of default covered by templates T4-T6 (non-
          retail)”. These fields should be completed with the ID provided in the registry
          template (cf. Chapter 4). If either Sheets “T1” to “T3” or Sheets “T4” through “T6” are
          not completed, the respective field should be left empty. If a definition of default
          covers both retail and non-retail exposures (cf. Section 5.1), the ID of the given
          definition of default should be inserted in both the “ID of the definition of default
          covered by templates T1-T3 (retail)” and “ID of the definition of default covered by
          templates T4-T6 (non-retail)” fields.
          In addition to the mandatory fields mentioned above, institutions may provide free-
          text comments in a dedicated field at the bottom of the sheet.
Example 6 In the situation described in Example 3 above, Institution B is expected to submit
          either four or five templates. In each template provided for the definitions of default
          used by Institution B itself, fields “Institution LEI code” and “Name of institution”
          contain the LEI code and name of Institution B. For subsidiaries B1 and B2, the fields
          contain the LEI code and name of the respective subsidiary. While the fields “Name
          Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                                                                  32

      of the highest consolidating entity within the submitting party” and “LEI of the highest
      consolidating entity within the submitting party” are left empty in the templates for
      Institution B itself, for the subsidiaries these fields should include a reference to
      Institution B.
5.2.2 Sheet “Index”
      Sheet “Index” provides an overview of Sheets “T1” to “T6”, the content of which is
      detailed in the paragraphs below.
      Figure 11: Gap analysis template – Sheet “Index”
                                        Definition of Default Gap Analysis - Index
                                                       TEMPLATES
        Template
                                                          Name of Template
         Number
           T1     REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN REGULATORY TECHNICAL STANDARDS (RETAIL EXPOSURES)
           T2     REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN GUIDELINES (RETAIL EXPOSURES)
           T3     OPTIONAL PRACTICES SET FORTH IN GUIDELINES (RETAIL EXPOSURES)
           T4     REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN REGULATORY TECHNICAL STANDARDS (NON-RETAIL EXPOSURES)
           T5     REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN GUIDELINES (NON-RETAIL EXPOSURES)
           T6     OPTIONAL PRACTICES SET FORTH IN GUIDELINES (NON-RETAIL EXPOSURES)
      It is for reference only <U+2012> no input is needed or permitted in this sheet.
5.2.3 Sheets “T1”, “T2”, “T4” and “T5”
      While the content and details of the requirements to be assessed within Sheets “T1”,
      “T2”, “T4” and “T5” differ, the questions in the titles of the columns within each sheet
      are the same. In particular, for each requirement within the Guidelines or ECB
      Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation covered in
      the given sheet, institutions are expected to provide the following information:
      •      whether the institution is already compliant with the cited requirement;
      •      any deviations of the current implementation from the requirement;
      •      whether achieving full compliance requires changes to the procedures and/or IT
             systems;
      •      a description of the required changes and the corresponding implementation
             plan;
      •      the estimated time in months for the required changes to the procedures and/or
             IT systems to be implemented, including testing and implementation on live
             systems.
      For reference, requirements in Sheets “T2” and “T5” are linked to the relevant
      paragraphs of the Guidelines while requirements in Sheets “T1” and “T4” are linked
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                            33

                                 to the relevant articles of the Delegated Regulation containing the regulatory
                                 technical standards for the materiality threshold to be transposed into the ECB
                                 Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ. Institutions are expected to complete all rows.
                                 Figure 12: Gap analysis template – Sheet “T2”
                                                                                                                                                                                      #Missing answers:                            #Missing answers:                 #Missing answers:                #Missing answers:                #Missing answers:
                                                                                                                                                                                               135                                         135                              135                               135                              135
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Please provide the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     estimated time in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Does achieving full                                               months for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   compliance require                                                required changes to
                                                                                                                                                     Relevant paragraph Is the institution already compliant with the Please specify the deviations of the current                      Please describe the required changes and the
                                      Requirement                                                                                Relevant chapter in                                                                                                               changes to the                                                    the procedures
                                                                                    Requirement                                                          in the EBA     cited requirement?                            implementation from the requirement.                              corresponding implementation plan.
                                       identifier                                                                                the EBA Guidelines                                                                                                                procedures and/or IT                                              and/or IT systems,
                                                                                                                                                         Guidelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   systems?                                                          including testing and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     implementation on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     live systems.
                                                                                                                                                                                               010                                         020                              030                               040                              050
                                                  For the purpose of assessing the materiality of past due credit obligations,
                                  101    T2-1     the institution takes into account any amount of principal, interest or fee            4                    16
                                                  that has not been paid at the date it was due
                                                  In case of modifications of the schedule of credit obligations, the
                                  102    T2-2     institution’s policies clarifies that the counting of days past due is based           4                    16
                                                  on the modified schedule of payments
                                                  Where the credit arrangement explicitly allows the obligor to change the
                                                  schedule, suspend or postpone the payments under certain conditions and
                                                  the obligor acts within the rights granted in the contract, the institution
                                                  does not consider changed, suspended or postponed instalments as past
                                  103    T2-3                                                                                            4                    17
                                                  due and bases the counting of days past on the new schedule once it is
                                                  specified. Nevertheless if the obligor changes the schedule, suspends or
                                                  postpones the payments, the institution analyses the reasons for such a
                                                  change and assess the possible indications of unlikeliness to pay
                                                  Where the repayment of the obligation is suspended because of a law
                                                  allowing this option or other legal restrictions, the institution suspends the
                                                  counting of days past due during that period. Nevertheless, in such
                                  104    T2-4                                                                                            4                    18
                                                  situations, the institution analyses, where possible, the reasons for
                                                  exercising the option for such a suspension and assesses the possible
                                                  indications of unlikeliness to pay
                                                  Where the obligor changes due to an event such as a merger or
                                                  acquisition of the obligor or any other similar transaction, the counting of
                                  105    T2-5     days past due starts from the moment a different person or entity                      4                    20
                                                  becomes obliged to pay the obligation. The counting of days past due is,
                                                  instead, unaffected by a change in the obligor’s name
Input 1: Is the institution      In the column with identifier 010, institutions may choose from four possible answers:
already compliant with the cited
requirement?
                                 •         “Fully compliant implementation”;
                                 •         “Partially compliant implementation”;
                                 •         “Non-compliant implementation”;
                                 •         “No implementation in current default definition”.
                                 “Fully compliant implementation” should be selected if no further amendments to the
                                 institution’s definition of default are necessary to fully comply with the requirement for
                                 all types of exposures to which the definition of default covered in the given template
                                 is applied (“relevant types of exposures”). This option should not be selected if the
                                 institution’s corresponding definition of default implementation is already stricter than
                                 the requirements proposed, unless such treatment is explicitly allowed under the
                                 Guidelines or ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated
                                 Regulation.
                                 “Partially compliant implementation” should be selected if an institution has largely
                                 implemented the requirement for most or all relevant types of exposures, but there
                                 are still small deviations whose impact on full compliance with the requirement for all
                                 relevant types of exposures can be considered to be limited (cf. Example 7).
                                 “Non-compliant implementation” should be selected if the essence of the
                                 requirement is addressed by the definition of default that is currently applied by the
                                 institution for all relevant types of exposures, but the current implementation is
                                 inconsistent with the requirement set out in either the Guidelines or ECB Regulation
                                 (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation such that the definition
                                 of default would be non-compliant with the requirement once applicable, and the
                                 impact of the deviation cannot be considered to be limited (cf. Example 8).
                                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   34

                                     “No implementation in current default definition” should be selected if the cited
                                     requirement is not currently addressed at all in the institution’s definition of default for
                                     all relevant types of exposures (cf. Example 9).
Input 2: Please specify              In the column with identifier 020, institutions are expected to provide a detailed
the deviations of the current
implementation from the              description of all aspects of the current implementation that deviate from the future
requirement.                         requirements of the Guidelines or ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
                                     with the Delegated Regulation. This field should only be completed if “Partially
                                     compliant implementation”, “Non-compliant implementation” or “No implementation in
                                     current default definition” was selected in the column with identifier 010 of the
                                     corresponding row. In all other cases this field should be left blank.
Input 3: Does achieving full         The input in the column with identifier 030 can be either “Yes” or “No” (dropdown
compliance require changes to the
procedures and/or IT systems?        menu). If any option other than “Fully compliant implementation” was selected in the
                                     column with identifier 010 of the corresponding row, institutions are expected to
                                     specify whether the process of fully implementing the requirement in question will
                                     require changes to the institution’s procedures and/or IT systems, including
                                     documentation relating specifically to the recognition of defaults. In all other cases
                                     this field should be left blank.
                                     For the purposes of this document, the term “procedures” is intended to refer
                                     explicitly to the procedures associated with the recognition of defaults rather than to
                                     the risk management and decision-making process referred to in Article 144(1)(b) of
                                     the CRR.
Input 4: Please describe the         In the column with identifier 040 (free-text field), institutions should describe the
required changes and the
corresponding implementation plan.   required changes and the corresponding high-level implementation plan for
                                     achieving full compliance with the requirement (as if already applicable). The
                                     description should make a clear distinction between changes to be applied to the
                                     functional processes or documentation and changes to be applied to IT systems.
                                     Changes to the functional processes or documentation may include necessary
                                     changes to internal guidelines (e.g. for the internal use of the model as set out in
                                     Chapter 4 of the final draft RTS on the assessment methodology for the IRBA). This
                                     field may only be completed if “Yes” was selected in the column with identifier 030 of
                                     the corresponding row. It should otherwise be left blank.
Input 5: Please provide the          In the column with identifier 050, a non-negative integer can be inserted (only) if
estimated time in months for the
required changes to the procedures   “Yes” was selected in the column with identifier 030. To determine the appropriate
and/or IT systems, including testing entry for this field, institutions should estimate the number of months that
and implementation on live
systems.                             implementation of the changes to procedures and/or IT systems described in the
                                     column with identifier 040 is expected to take, starting from the date of submission of
                                     the application package. The estimate should include all steps that have not yet
                                     been completed (i.e. from writing a business specification to the final go-live with
                                     certain release after fully fledged testing). For the purposes of this estimate,
                                     institutions should assume that all changes necessary to achieve a fully compliant
                                     definition of default that had not already been implemented on the date of
                                     submission of the application package will be implemented jointly and in parallel (i.e.
                                     that the number of months indicated refers to the same starting point, namely the
                                     submission date, for all rows). If the estimated effort includes a fraction of a month,
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                           35

          the estimate should be rounded up to the next highest integer (i.e. 1.5 months should
          be entered in the template as 2 months).
Example 7 Consider a situation in which a definition of default currently used by Institution A
          already includes a probation period. Rather than being defined as (at least) three
          months, however, the institution applies a probation period of 90 days.
          In this case the answer to the first question (column identifier 010) for requirement
          “T2-65”/“T5-65” in Templates “T2”/“T5” should be “Partially compliant
          implementation”, as the definition of default encompasses a probation period and its
          configuration is largely in line with the provisions of the Guidelines. Assuming for the
          purposes of this example that the impact on full compliance with the requirement for
          all relevant types of exposures can be considered to be limited, the institution may
          consider itself partially compliant with the requirement. In line with Example 8,
          Institution A needs to explain the deviation and complete the questions about its
          planned actions as illustrated in detail in that context.
Example 8 Consider instead the following scenario: Institution B already applies a probation
          period, but only for defaults triggered by the past-due criterion. In addition, this
          period is set to two months rather than “at least three” months as prescribed in the
          Guidelines.
          When answering the questions about requirement “T2-65”/“T5-65” in Templates
          “T2”/“T5”, the institution should provide the following answers:
          Is the institution already compliant with the cited requirement? “Non-compliant
          implementation”: The institution has implemented part of the requirement, but
          implementation is not yet compliant with it because the number of months needs to
          be changed and the probation period is only applied to defaults triggered by the past-
          due criterion.
          The example combines two deviations, rendering the implementation non-compliant.
          Each deviation individually would also render the implementation non-compliant, as
          the impact of each cannot be considered to be limited.
          Please specify the deviations of the current implementation from the requirement.
          The institution should explain that it already applies a probation period, including the
          current length of the probation period and its current scope of application, but that
          the period used is too short and only applies for a certain type of default.
          Does achieving full compliance require changes to the procedures and/or IT
          systems? “Yes”: To remedy the deviation, the institution must make changes to its IT
          systems and to processes and documentation relating specifically to the recognition
          of defaults.
          Please describe the required changes and the corresponding implementation plan.
          To answer this question, the institution should explain the necessary changes (IT
          systems, process change for reclassifying defaults other than those triggered by the
          past-due criterion, adjustment of corresponding documentation) and provide a high-
          Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                         36

                level plan of the steps required to achieve full compliance with the requirement,
                including a high-level timeline.
                Please provide the estimated time in months for the required changes to the
                procedures and/or IT systems, including testing and implementation on live-systems.
                “5”: The institution estimates that the overall time needed to achieve compliance,
                including all steps outlined in its response to the previous question (column identifier
                040) but excluding any steps already completed at the date of submission of the
                application package, is about five months.
Example 9       The definition of default currently used by Institution C does not include a probation
                period. In addition, the institution’s internal instructions do not mention that defaulted
                customers will only be cured after a given probation period.
                Since there is no implementation at all, unlike in Example 8 the answer to the first
                question (column identifier 010) for requirement “T2-65”/“T5-65” in Templates
                “T2”/“T5” should be “No implementation in current default definition”. In this case
                (only), rather than explaining the deviations, the institution may simply note that the
                requirement had not been implemented as at the reference date. Depending on the
                institution’s action plan, the third, fourth and fifth questions should be answered as
                illustrated in Example 8.
          5.2.4 Sheets “T3” and “T6”
                Sheets “T3” and “T6” deal with optional practices described in the Guidelines that
                may but do not have to be factored into the new definition of default. Retail and non-
                retail exposures are covered in separate sheets <U+2012> “T3” covers retail exposures
                assigned to the retail exposure class in accordance with Article 147(2)(d) of the
                CRR, while “T6” covers non-retail exposures assigned to the exposure classes in
                accordance with Article 147(2)(a), (b), (c) and/or (e) of the CRR. Institutions are
                expected to provide the following information:
                •      whether the institution is (already) applying the optional practice described;
                •      whether the institution is planning to apply the optional practice described as
                       part of the new definition of default;
                •      a list of the exposure classes to which the optional practice is supposed to be
                       applied under the new definition of default (in the case of retail exposures, with
                       reference to the sub-classes in accordance with Article 154(1), (3) or (4) of the
                       CRR that the optional practice is being applied to);
                •      whether applying the optional practice requires changes to the procedures
                       and/or IT systems;
                •      a description of the required changes and the corresponding implementation
                       plan;
                Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                           37

                                        •            the estimated time in months for the required changes to the procedures and/or
                                                     IT systems to be implemented, including testing and implementation on live
                                                     systems.
                                        For reference, each optional practice is linked to the relevant paragraph of the
                                        Guidelines. ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated
                                        Regulation does not include any optional practices. Institutions are expected to
                                        complete all rows.
                                        Figure 13: Gap analysis template – Sheet “T3”
                                                                                                                                                                                     #Missing answers:     #Missing answers:                     #Missing answers:               #Missing answers:                  #Missing answers:                #Missing answers:
                                                                                                                                                                                              27                    27                                   27                               27                                 27                               27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Please provide the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   estimated time in
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Is the institution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Does applying the                                                   months for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                         planning to apply the
                                                                                                                                                                                   Is the institution                            Please list the exposure classes to which the optional practice                                                   required changes to
                                                                                                                                                                Relevant paragraph                       optional practice                                                                            Please describe the required changes and the
                                             Optional practice                                                                              Relevant chapter in                    applying the optional                         optional practice is supposed to be applied   require changes to the                                              the procedures
                                                                                            Optional practice                                                       in the EBA                           described when                                                                               corresponding implementation plan.
                                                 identifier                                                                                 the EBA Guidelines                     practice described?                           under the new definition of default.          procedures and/or IT                                                and/or IT systems,
                                                                                                                                                                    Guidelines                           changing its definition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               systems?                                                            including testing and
                                                                                                                                                                                                         of default?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   implementation on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   live systems.
                                                                                                                                                                                             010                   020                                  030                              040                                050                              060
                                                               For the purpose of assessing the materiality of credit obligations, where
                                                               the repayment of an obligations is subject to a dispute, the institution may
                                                               suspend the counting of day past due if the dispute over the existence or
                                         101       T3-1        amount of the credit obligation has been introduced to a court or another            4                   19 a
                                                               formal procedure performed by a dedicated external body that results in
                                                               a binding ruling in accordance with the applicable legal framework in the
                                                               relevant jurisdiction
                                                               For the purpose of assessing the materiality of credit obligations, where
                                                               the repayment of an obligations is subject to a dispute, the institution may
                                                               suspend the counting of day past due, if - in the specific case of leasing -
                                         102       T3-2        a formal complaint has been directed to the institution about the object of          4                   19 b
                                                               the contract and the merit of the complaint has been confirmed by
                                                               independent internal audit, internal validation or another comparable
                                                               independent auditing unit
                                                               Where the conditions for applying the specific treatment for exposures
                                                               towards central governments, local authorities and public sector entities
                                         103       T3-3        are met and the institution decides to apply this specific treatment, these          4                   26 a
                                                               exposures are not included in the calculation of the materiality threshold
                                                               for other exposures to this obligor
                                                               Where the conditions for applying the specific treatment for exposures
                                                               towards central governments, local authorities and public sector entities
                                         104       T3-4                                                                                             4                   26 b
                                                               are met and institution decides to apply the specific treatment, these
                                                               exposures are not considered as defaults
                                                               Where the conditions for applying the specific treatment for exposures
                                                               towards central governments, local authorities and public sector entities
                                         105       T3-5                                                                                             4                   26 c
                                                               are met and institution decides to apply the specific treatment, the
                                                               institution documents the exposures subject to the specific treatment
Input 1: Is the institution applying    The input in the column with identifier 010 can be either “Yes” or “No” (dropdown
the optional practice described?
                                        menu). If an institution is already fully applying the specific optional practice
                                        described in the corresponding row as at the reference date, it should choose
                                        “Yes”. The same response should also be given if the institution only partially applies
                                        the optional practice, but its adherence to the optional practice is already deemed to
                                        be high. In all other cases the response should be “No”, indicating that the optional
                                        practice is either not applied on a regular basis or is not applied at all.
Input 2: Is the institution planning to In the column with identifier 020, institutions may choose from three possible
apply the optional practice
described when changing its             answers:
definition of default?
                                        •            “Yes, to all exposures”;
                                        •            “Yes, to some exposures”;
                                        •            “No”.
                                        Institutions are expected to indicate whether they intend to apply the given optional
                                        practice as part of the new definition of default (i.e. rather than describing the status
                                        quo, institutions are asked to refer to the target application of the optional practice
                                        following introduction of the new definition of default). If an institution intends to start
                                        applying an optional practice or continue to do so, the question should be answered
                                        with “Yes, to all exposures” or “Yes, to some exposures” depending on whether this
                                        relates to all or only some of the exposures to which the given definition of default is
                                        applied. The answer should otherwise be “No” and the fields for the columns with
                                        identifiers 030 to 050 within the corresponding row should be left blank.
                                        Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           38

Input 3: Please list the exposure    If an institution has selected “Yes, to some exposures” in the column with identifier
classes to which the optional
practice is supposed to be applied   020 for a specific optional practice, it should list in the column with identifier 030 the
under the new definition of default. exposures for which it is planning to apply the optional practice under the new
                                     definition of default. Institutions should list the retail exposure classes in accordance
                                     with Article 154(1), (3) or (4) of the CRR in Sheet “T3”, while Sheet “T6” is for the
                                     non-retail exposure classes defined in Article 147(2)(a), (b), (c) and/or (e) of the
                                     CRR.
                                     If an institution has selected “Yes, to all exposures” or “No”, this field should be left
                                     blank.
Input 4: Does applying the optional  The input in the column with identifier 040 can be either “Yes” or “No” (dropdown
practice require changes to the
procedures and/or IT systems?        menu). If the inputs for the columns with identifiers 010 and 020 are “No”, the
                                     corresponding field should be left blank. Otherwise, institutions are expected to
                                     specify whether the process of fully implementing the optional practice in question as
                                     part of the new definition of default will require changes to the institution’s
                                     procedures and/or IT systems, including documentation relating specifically to the
                                     recognition of defaults. If it will not, the selection should be “No”.
                                     For the purposes of this document, the term “procedures” is intended to refer
                                     explicitly to the procedures associated with the recognition of defaults rather than to
                                     the risk management and decision-making process referred to in Article 144(1)(b) of
                                     the CRR.
Input 5: Please describe the         In the column with identifier 050 (free-text field), institutions should describe the
required changes and the
corresponding implementation plan.   required changes and the corresponding high-level implementation plan to achieve
                                     full application of the optional practice following introduction of the new definition of
                                     default. The description should make a clear distinction between changes to be
                                     applied to the functional processes or documentation and changes to be applied to
                                     IT systems. Changes to the functional processes may include necessary changes to
                                     internal guidelines (e.g. for the internal use of the model as set out in Chapter 4 of
                                     the final draft RTS on the assessment methodology for the IRBA). This field may only
                                     be completed if the input in the column with identifier 040 for the corresponding row
                                     was “Yes”.
Input 6: Please provide the          In the column with identifier 060, a non-negative integer can be inserted (only) if
estimated time in months for the
required changes to the procedures   “Yes” was selected in the column with identifier 040. To determine the appropriate
and/or IT systems, including testing entry for this field, institutions should estimate the number of months that
and implementation on live
systems.                             implementation of the changes to procedures and/or IT systems described in the
                                     column with identifier 050 is expected to take, starting from the date of submission of
                                     the application package. The estimate should include all steps that have not yet
                                     been completed (i.e. from writing a business specification to the final go-live with
                                     certain release after fully fledged testing). For the purposes of this estimate,
                                     institutions should assume that all changes necessary to achieve full application of
                                     the optional practice that had not already been implemented on the date of
                                     submission of the application package will be implemented jointly and in parallel (i.e.
                                     that the number of months indicated refers to the same starting point, namely the
                                     submission date, for all rows). If the estimated effort includes a fraction of a month,
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                            39

      the estimate should be rounded up to the next highest integer (i.e. 1.5 months should
      be entered in the template as 2 months).
5.2.5 Sheet “Guidance”
      Sheet “Guidance” contains explanations on how to complete the template. The
      information presented in the sheet is a summary of the guidance offered in this
      document.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Gap analysis                    40

                     6             Qualitative impact analysis
                                   The impact analysis builds on the results of the gap analysis by exploring in detail
                                   the impact of the new definition of default, approximated by means of the gaps
                                   identified, on institutions’ exposures and ultimately on their own funds requirements.
                                   It comprises two components: a qualitative and a quantitative impact analysis. The
                                   qualitative component first compiles all gaps identified in the gap analysis and
                                   indicates whether a gap is later included in the quantitative analysis or only assessed
                                   qualitatively. A qualitative impact analysis is exclusively needed for those gaps for
                                   which institutions are not able to provide a quantitative impact analysis. As detailed
                                   in Chapter 7, the aim of the quantitative component is to provide a best estimate of
                                   the impact of introducing the new definition of default on institutions’ portfolios.
                                   Institutions are strongly encouraged to assess all gaps identified in the gap analysis
                                   as part of their quantitative impact analysis. This includes those optional practices
                                   described in the Guidelines that they are planning to apply for the first time when
                                   changing their definition of default as indicated in the gap template (cf. Section
                                   5.2.4). If a large number of gaps are only assessed on a qualitative basis, this will be
                                   interpreted as implying a lower reliability of the quantitative impact analysis and may
                                   influence assessment under the supervisory decision process.
                                   To carry out the qualitative impact analysis, an institution should assess, at the level
                                   of each individual rating system, the materiality of the impact of the changes required
                                   to achieve full compliance with the new definition of default on its default rates and,
                                   where applicable, on its realised LGDs and realised conversion factors. It is
                                   important to note that while the qualitative self-assessment of the impact on default
                                   rates and realised LGDs should be carried out at the level of each individual
                                   requirement/optional practice, the qualitative self-assessment of the impact on
                                   realised conversion factors is to be conducted on an aggregate basis for all gaps
                                   identified.
                                   A dedicated template (“qualitative impact template”) attached to this document
                                   structures an institution’s assessment by compiling all gaps identified within the gap
                                   analysis and indicating which of these are included in the quantitative impact
                                   analysis. A qualitative impact analysis should be carried out for all gaps that are not
                                   assessed quantitatively.
Level of granularity of the impact In principle, both the qualitative and the quantitative impact analyses are required at
analyses
                                   the level of each rating system in accordance with point (1) of Article 142(1) of the
                                   CRR, i.e. at the level of the methods, processes, controls, data collection and IT
                                   systems that support the assessment of credit risk, the assignment of exposures to
                                   rating grades or pools, and the quantification of default and loss estimates that have
                                   been developed for a certain type of exposures as defined in point (2) of Article
                                   142(1) of the CRR.
                                   This level of granularity was chosen to simplify the analysis and ensure that the
                                   information collected is meaningful and useful.
                                   Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis         41

    The link between a given rating system and the definitions of default associated with
    it as recorded in the registry template (cf. Chapter 4) should form the basis for
    compiling all gaps, as listed in the gap template for the given definition(s) of default,
    that are relevant for that rating system. Using this list, institutions should carry out a
    qualitative self-assessment of each requirement and/or optional practice for which
    they indicated less than full compliance for each rating system and which are not
    assessed as part of the quantitative impact analysis. If a rating system is linked to
    more than one definition of default, institutions should consider them separately by
    carrying out separate qualitative impact self-assessments. As such, the level of
    granularity in the qualitative impact analysis should be the combination of a given
    rating system and the associated definitions of default. As detailed in Chapter 7, the
    quantitative impact analysis is carried out strictly at the level of each rating system.
    This chapter provides details on the information that is expected to be provided in
    the qualitative impact analysis and offers guidance on completing the qualitative
    impact template.
6.1 General guidance
    As a general rule, the qualitative impact template should be completed by the
    supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
    Each template allows for analysis of up to ten rating systems. If an institution uses
    fewer than ten rating systems, it may leave the surplus sheets empty; if it uses more
    than ten, it needs to submit more than one template.
    The qualitative self-assessment in respect of changes in the default rate and realised
    LGD for a given gap that cannot be included in the quantitative impact analysis
    should be conducted with a view to measuring the expected overall impact on the
    RWEA and EL amounts (i.e. on the capital absorption) of the exposures assigned to
    that rating system. The result of the assessment should be carefully documented
    and should comprise a detailed explanation of the reason(s) why the gap was not
    included in the quantitative impact analysis together with the rationale for the
    reported direction and strength of the anticipated qualitative impact. Given that a
    large number of gaps that are only assessed on a qualitative basis diminishes the
    reliability of the quantitative self-assessment, the justifications provided within the
    template are indispensable inputs to the supervisory decision process.
    All qualitative impact templates should be submitted using the following naming
    convention: “qual_impact_template_[LEICode]_[NrTemplate].xlsx”, where:
    •     [LEICode] denotes the LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of
          consolidation within the submitting party;
    •     [NrTemplate] is a consecutive number provided for each qualitative impact
          template, e.g. 1 for the first template, 2 for the second template, and n for the
          nth template.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis            42

6.2   Guidance on the template
      The qualitative impact template is an Excel workbook comprising a total of 12
      sheets:
      •         General Information
      •         Sheet_1 to Sheet_10
      •         Guidance
      Sheet “General Information” asks for basic reference data on the supervised entity at
      the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party, while Sheets “Sheet_1”
      to “Sheet_10” are the qualitative self-assessment reports to be completed for rating
      systems 1 to 10. Sheet “Guidance” contains no input fields but provides information
      on how to complete the other sheets within the template. Detailed guidance on how
      to complete each input field is provided in the following subsections. Where Sheets
      “Sheet_1” to “Sheet_10” of a single qualitative impact template are not sufficient to
      cover all relevant rating systems and given definitions of default, institutions should
      use several qualitative impact templates.
6.2.1 Sheet “General Information”
      To link the submission to the gap and quantitative impact analyses, in Sheet
      “General Information” institutions are expected to provide the name and LEI code of
      the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
      In addition to the mandatory fields mentioned above, institutions may provide free-
      text comments at the bottom of the sheet.
      Figure 14: Qualitative impact template – Sheet "General Information"
                                              Definition of Default Qualitative Impact Analysis - General Information
                                                                                                                 Template Version: 1.01
      Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
      submitting party:
      LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
      submitting party:
                                                  General / additional comments to the answers provided herein
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis                                                     43

       6.2.2 Sheets “Sheet_1” to “Sheet_10”
             The content and details of each of the qualitative impact reports “Sheet_1” to
             “Sheet_10” are identical. The template is set up in this way to reduce the number of
             files that institutions need to handle. It is important to reiterate that the analysis must
             be carried out at the level of each rating system or, where a rating system is linked to
             more than one definition of default, the combination of a given rating system and
             each of the associated definitions of default. It may thus be the case that gaps
             identified for a given definition of default need to be assessed in relation to more
             than one rating system, i.e. in more than one sheet.
             For completeness, in each qualitative impact report institutions are expected to
             compile a complete list of the gaps identified in the gap analysis and provide the
             following information for each gap identified:
             •                   whether the gap is included in the quantitative impact analysis;
             •                   if it has not been included in the quantitative impact analysis but a requirement
                                 and/or optional practice can be assessed quantitatively (information generated
                                 automatically within the corresponding column of the template):
                                 •                   a rationale for why the gap was not included in the quantitative impact
                                                     analysis;
                                 •                   a qualitative self-assessment of the impact of the changes required on the
                                                     default rates of the respective type of exposures;
                                 •                   where an institution also applies own estimates of the LGD for the
                                                     respective type of exposures, a qualitative self-assessment of the impact
                                                     of the required changes on the realised LGDs of this type of exposures;
                                 •                   a rationale for the qualitative impact self-assessment.
             For the purposes of the qualitative impact analysis, institutions may understand the
             term “material impact” as an impact that is significant enough to call into question the
             validity of the estimates used as referred to in Article 185(e) of the CRR.
             Figure 15: Qualitative impact template – Sheet “Sheet_1”
             Name of the entity within the organisational structure of the submitting party applying the rating
             system:
             LEI code of the entity within the organisational structure of the submitting party applying the rating
             system:
             The information provided herein is linked to the following rating system:
             The information provided herein is linked to the following definition of default:
             Where an institution also applies own estimates of conversion factors for the respective type of
             exposures, please provide a qualitative assessment of the impact of the required changes on the
             realised conversion factors of this type of exposures (otherwise select N/A).
             Where an institution also applies own estimates of conversion factors for the respective type of
             exposures, please provide a rationale for the qualitative assessment selected above (otherwise
             leave blank).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Where an institution also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Please provide a            applies own estimates of the
                Requirement /                                                                                                                                                                                        qualitative self-assessment LGD for the respective type of
               optional practice                                                                                                                  Are institutions asked to Please provide a rationale for why the   of the impact of the        exposures, please provide a    Please provide a rationale for the qualitative
                                                                                                                    Is the gap included in the
             identifier according                                                                                                                 assess this requirement   gap was not included in the quantitative changes required on the     qualitative self-assessment of impact self-assessment in the columns with
                                                           Requirement / optional practice                          quantitative impact analysis?
              to the gap analysis                                                                                                                 quantitatively?           impact analysis.                         default rates of the        the impact of the required     identifiers 040 and 050.
                   template                                                                                                                                                                                          respective type of          changes on the realised LGDs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     exposures.                  of this type of exposures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (otherwise select N/A).
                      ID                                                                                                           010                          020                            030                                040                            050                                   060
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
                                  No identifier provided                                                                                                       #N/A
Header
             Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                44

The header of each sheet asks for the name and LEI code 26 of the entity (at the
highest level of consolidation) within the organisational structure of the submitting
party applying the rating system being assessed together with the identifiers of the
rating system and definition of default (as given in the registry template) covered by
the self-assessment in the corresponding sheet.
Since in many cases the impact on (realised) conversion factors cannot be assessed
at the level of the individual requirements and/or optional practices in the Guidelines
and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation,
the header also requests an answer to the following question: “Where an institution
also applies own estimates of conversion factors for the respective type of
exposures, please provide a qualitative assessment of the impact of the required
changes on the realised conversion factors of this type of exposures (otherwise
select N/A).” To determine an entry for this field, institutions are asked to take
account of all changes introduced to a given rating system and provide an overall
expert qualitative self-assessment of the impact on the estimates for CCFs and thus
on exposure values (EAD) when implemented in the rating system, if any such
impact exists.
To carry out the self-assessment, institutions may choose from seven possible
answers in a dropdown menu:
•     “++” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
      CCFs and exposure values (EAD) are likely to increase considerably;
•     “+” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that CCFs
      and exposure values (EAD) are likely to increase, but the materiality of the
      change is limited;
•     “o” should be selected if institutions do not expect any impact on their CCFs
      and exposure values (EAD) when closing the gap;
•     “-” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that CCFs
      and exposure values (EAD) are likely to decrease, but the materiality of the
      change is limited;
•     “--” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
      CCFs and exposure values (EAD) are likely to decrease considerably;
•     “?” should be selected if institutions cannot assess the materiality of the change
      – in terms of direction and/or magnitude – with any degree of certainty;
•     “N/A” should be selected if institutions do not estimate CCFs when calculating
      own funds requirements as part of the given rating system for the type of
      exposures in question.
26
    According to the Global Legal Entity Identifier Foundation, GLEIF: https://www.gleif.org.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis                 45

                                    In addition to the qualitative assessment, institutions are asked to provide a rationale
                                    for their qualitative assessment. If the answer to the previous question was “N/A”, the
                                    field should be left blank.
Requirement / optional practice     In the column with identifier “ID”, institutions are expected to provide the identifier of
identifier according to the gap
template                            all gaps identified for the corresponding definition of default in the gap analysis. A
                                    gap is defined as either: (1) a requirement for which the institution chose any answer
                                    other than “Fully compliant implementation” as its answer to the question “Is the
                                    institution already compliant with the cited requirement?” (column identifier 010 in
                                    Sheets “T1”, “T2”, “T4” or “T5” of the gap template(s)), or (2) an optional practice that
                                    the institution does not currently apply but plans to for some or all exposures after
                                    changing its definition of default, or an optional practice that it is currently applying
                                    but whose application will be discontinued when the definition of default is changed
                                    (columns with identifiers 010 and 020 in Sheets “T3” or “T6” of the gap template(s)).
                                    If the identifier is entered correctly, the template automatically reproduces the exact
                                    wording of the corresponding requirement or optional practice in the column labelled
                                    “Requirement/optional practice”. If the identifier is not entered correctly in a given
                                    row, the error message “Identifier not found” will be shown in the column labelled
                                    “Requirement/optional practice” for that row. If no identifier is entered, the message
                                    “No identifier provided” will be shown in the column labelled “Requirement/optional
                                    practice”.
Input 1: Is the gap included in the The input for the column with identifier 010 can be either “Yes” or “No” (dropdown
quantitative impact analysis?
                                    menu). If the institution has included an impact simulation for a given gap in the
                                    quantitative impact analysis, the answer to this question should be “Yes”. Institutions
                                    should also choose “Yes” if a gap does not apply to a given rating system. In both of
                                    these cases, none of the other questions need to be answered. Otherwise, the
                                    answer should be “No” and the institution should proceed with the remaining
                                    questions/inputs.
Input 2 (automated response): Are   The input for the column with identifier 020 is generated automatically by the
institutions asked to assess this
requirement quantitatively?         template based on the ECB’s evaluation of whether or not a meaningful quantitative
                                    assessment is possible for the requirement/optional practice in question. It can be
                                    either “Yes” or “No”. If a meaningful quantitative assessment cannot be carried out
                                    for a given gap, e.g. in documentation, the answer to this question will be “No”. If this
                                    is the case, none of the other questions need to be answered, i.e. neither a
                                    quantitative nor a qualitative impact self-assessment is requested for such gaps.
                                    Otherwise, the institution should provide a qualitative self-assessment of the
                                    expected impact when closing the gap and a rationale for why it was not included in
                                    the quantitative impact analysis.
Input 3: Please provide a rationale In the column with identifier 030 (free-text field), institutions are expected to explain
for why the gap was not included in
the quantitative impact analysis.   why a given gap for which a meaningful quantitative assessment is in principle
                                    possible was not included in the quantitative impact analysis.
                                    This field may only be completed if the given gap was not included in the quantitative
                                    impact analysis even though a meaningful quantitative assessment could be carried
                                    out (i.e. the response to the question in the column with identifier 010 was “No” and
                                    Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis             46

                                      the response to the question in the column with identifier 020 was “Yes”). In all other
                                      cases, this field should be left blank.
Input 4: Please provide a qualitative In the column with identifier 040, institutions are expected to provide a qualitative
self-assessment of the impact of
the changes required on the default   self-assessment of the given gap’s impact on default rates when the required
rates of the respective type of       changes are implemented in the rating system. This field may only be completed if
exposures.
                                      the given gap was not included in the quantitative impact analysis even though a
                                      meaningful quantitative assessment could be carried out (i.e. the response to the
                                      question in the column with identifier 010 was “No” and the response to the question
                                      in the column with identifier 020 was “Yes”). In all other cases, this field should be left
                                      blank.
                                      To carry out the self-assessment, institutions may choose from six possible answers
                                      in a dropdown menu:
                                      •     “++” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
                                            default rates are likely to increase considerably;
                                      •     “+” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that default
                                            rates are likely to increase, but the materiality of the change is limited;
                                      •     “o” should be selected if institutions do not expect any impact on their default
                                            rates when closing the gap;
                                      •     “-” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that default
                                            rates are likely to decrease, but the materiality of the change is limited;
                                      •     “--” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
                                            default rates are likely to decrease considerably;
                                      •     “?” should be selected if institutions cannot assess the materiality of the change
                                            – in terms of both direction and magnitude – with any degree of certainty.
Input 5: Where an institution also    In the column with identifier 050, institutions are expected to provide a qualitative
applies own estimates of the LGD
for the respective type of            self-assessment of the given gap’s impact on realised LGDs when implemented in
exposures, please provide a           the rating system. This field may only be completed if the given gap was not included
qualitative self-assessment of the
impact of the required changes on     in the quantitative impact analysis even though a meaningful quantitative
the realised LGDs of this type of
                                      assessment could be carried out (i.e. the response to the question in the column with
exposures (otherwise select N/A).
                                      identifier 010 was “No” and the response to the question in the column with identifier
                                      020 was “Yes”). In all other cases, this field should be left blank.
                                      To carry out the self-assessment, institutions may choose from seven possible
                                      answers in a dropdown menu:
                                      •     “++” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
                                            realised LGDs are likely to increase considerably;
                                      •     “+” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that realised
                                            LGDs are likely to increase, but the materiality of the change is limited;
                                      Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis           47

                                    •     “o” should be selected if institutions do not expect any impact on their realised
                                          LGDs when closing the gap;
                                    •     “-” should be selected if institutions expect an impact in the sense that realised
                                          LGDs are likely to decrease, but the materiality of the change is limited;
                                    •     “--” should be selected if institutions expect a material impact in the sense that
                                          realised LGDs are likely to decrease considerably;
                                    •     “?” should be selected if institutions cannot assess the materiality of the change
                                          – in terms of both direction and magnitude – with any degree of certainty;
                                    •     “N/A” should be selected if institutions do not estimate LGDs when calculating
                                          own funds requirements for the type of exposures in question.
Input 6: Please provide a rationale In the column with identifier 060 (free-text field), institutions are expected to justify
for the qualitative impact self-
assessment in the columns with      the levels of impact they chose as their entries for the columns with identifiers 040
identifiers 040 and 050.            and 050. Answers should explicitly highlight the key arguments underlying the self-
                                    assessment.
                                    This field may only be completed if the given gap was not included in the quantitative
                                    impact analysis even though a meaningful quantitative assessment could be carried
                                    out (i.e. the response to the question in the column with identifier 010 was “No” and
                                    the response to the question in the column with identifier 020 was “Yes”). In all other
                                    cases, this field should be left blank.
                      6.2.3         Sheet “Guidance”
                                    Sheet "Guidance" contains explanations on how to complete the template. The
                                    information presented in the sheet is a summary of the guidance offered in this
                                    document.
                                    Implementation of the new definition of default - Qualitative impact analysis             48

                    7          Quantitative impact analysis
                               The quantitative impact analysis constitutes the second, stand-alone component of
                               the impact analysis. While the qualitative impact analysis is carried out at the level of
                               individual gaps relating to a certain requirement of the Guidelines or ECB Regulation
                               (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and/or to a relevant
                               optional practice of the Guidelines, the quantitative impact analysis takes a more
                               general perspective. The latter is mainly concerned with estimating overall future
                               portfolio impacts due to the change in the definition of default. Even so, as indicated
                               in Chapter 6, the quantitative impact analysis, too, is requested at the level of the
                               rating system.
                               A dedicated template (“quantitative impact template”) is provided as an attachment to
                               this document. Institutions are expected to complete the quantitative impact template
                               using the guidance provided below, and to include it in the documentation submitted
                               as part of their application.
                               The quantitative impact analysis is requested at the level of the rating system.
                               The objective of this chapter is to provide details on the information expected to be
                               provided as part of the quantitative impact analysis. The chapter also offers guidance
                               on completing the quantitative impact template accompanying this document.
                    7.1        General guidance
Retrospective simulation       Since a live parallel run of both definitions of default would require a vast amount of
                               effort on the part of institutions and a long period of time to collect enough data,
                               institutions can instead use a retrospective simulation to approximate the impact of
                               the required change in the definition of default on all rating systems’ results. In
                               particular, the impact of a change in the definition of default on the estimated risk
                               parameters may be achieved by way of a retrospective simulation of the observed
                               default rates (ODRs) and cure rates. The simulation is to be performed without
                               adjusting the models currently in use. Instead, using the existing models in
                               conjunction with expert judgement, institutions are asked to determine how their
                               (defaulted and non-defaulted) exposures would behave if they were to adjust their
                               definitions of default such that they were in full compliance with the definition of
                               default set out in the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
                               with the Delegated Regulation.
                               This approach implicitly assumes the closure of all gaps identified in the gap analysis
                               set out in Chapter 5. If it is not possible to simulate the closure of a given gap within
                               the quantitative impact analysis, institutions should qualitatively assess the expected
                               impact of closing it (cf. Chapter 6).
Time horizon of the simulation The time horizon of the retrospective simulation should ideally be three years.
                               However, institutions are encouraged to use a longer period of time, as an analysis
                               Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis          49

based on a longer history increases the accuracy of the impact simulation. If
appropriate justification is provided in the dedicated comments field of the
quantitative impact template (cf. Section 7.3.1, below), institutions may reduce the
time period to two years, although it should be borne in mind that this reduces the
precision of the impact analysis. Hence, institutions may choose one of three
possible time periods:
•     standard time horizon – from 31 December 2014 to 31 December 2017;
•     reduced time horizon – from 31 December 2015 to 31 December 2017;
•     individual time horizon – from 31 December of a year before 2014 to 31
      December 2017.
According to the above, institutions are expected to provide simulation results for a
minimum time period of two years using the models most recently granted
supervisory approval according to Article 143 of the CRR. This means that
institutions should base their simulations on a “constant” set of models in the sense
that the methodology applied corresponds to the model(s) most recently approved
and that the methodology should not be altered during the time horizon considered
for the simulation owing to material or immaterial changes requiring ex ante
notification to the ECB. Should an institution have undertaken a model change of this
sort during the relevant two-year period, i.e. in 2016 or 2017, or if it is planning to do
so in 2018 or 2019, it should liaise with its JST as to the approach to be taken in its
particular situation. For the purposes of transparency during the assessment of the
model change to implement the new definition of default, institutions should
thoroughly document the agreement reached with the JST in the comments field of
the quantitative impact template.
To simulate the impact of the new definition of default, institutions are expected to
assess each obligor’s status on 31 December of each year (“observation date”)
within the chosen time period. All reported figures that constitute status information
(e.g. default status of the obligor, RWEA of exposures to the obligor, etc.) should be
recorded as at the observation dates (“date-specific data”), while all information
concerning default rates and cure rates should relate to the behaviour of a given
obligor between this observation date and the subsequent observation date (“period-
based data”).
Within the quantitative self-assessment template (cf. Section 7.3), all date-specific
data are collected in a dedicated sheet comprising all observation dates within the
corresponding time horizon. Likewise, all period-based data are collected in a
(separate) dedicated sheet comprising all observation years within the corresponding
time horizon. Where institutions choose to base their retrospective simulations on the
standard time horizon, they need to provide date-specific data for four different
observation dates, namely 31 December 2014, 31 December 2015, 31 December
2016 and 31 December 2017, and period-based data for three different observation
periods, namely 2015, 2016 and 2017 (cf. Figure 16). If an institution decides to
choose the reduced time horizon, the reported data are reduced by the first
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis           50

           observation date (31 December 2014) and the first observation period (2015)
           respectively.
           Figure 16: Information to be included in the quantitative impact analysis
                                                                Period-based data
                             Observation period 1:              Observation period 2:                  Observation period 3:
                                        2015                                 2016                                 2017
                                 Observed default                     Observed default                    Observed default
                                   and cure rate                         and cure rate                      and cure rate
             Observation date 1:                Observation date 2:                 Observation date 3:                   Observation date 4:
             31 December 2014                   31 December 2015                    31 December 2016                      31 December 2017
             › Number of (non-)                 › Number of (non-)                  › Number of (non-)                    › Number of (non-)
               defaulted obligors                 defaulted obligors                   defaulted obligors                   defaulted obligors
             › EAD amounts                      › EAD amounts                       › EAD amounts                         › EAD amounts
             › Average PD                       › Average PD                        › Average PD                          › Average PD
             › Average LGD                      › Average LGD                       › Average LGD                         › Average LGD
             › EL amounts                       › EL amounts                        › EL amounts                          › EL amounts
             › RWEA                             › RWEA                              › RWEA                                › RWEA
                                                                 Date-specific data
           The information depicted constitutes a stylised example for the standard time horizon (only). The number of observation periods and
           dates is increased by one for each additional year an institution chooses to report. Correspondingly, an institution may reduce the
           number of observation periods and dates by one if the reduced time horizon is chosen.
Example 10 Institution A has not changed its models or its definition(s) of default in five years.
           However, since the IT system used to compute the institution’s own funds
           requirements was replaced two years ago, it would be a significant burden to
           simulate the portfolio impact for more than two years. In this case, the institution may
           choose whether to provide two or three years of simulation results. However, it
           should be noted that the precision of the simulation results may suffer if only two
           years are provided and that this potential imprecision will be taken into account in the
           assessment of the model change as part of the supervisory process.
Example 11 Institution B has recently changed its PD model used for the calculation of own funds
           requirements. The change was approved in 2015. Institution B has two options:
           •       roll back the model change to 31 December 2014 in order to provide the
                   standard time horizon for the simulation as set out above;
           •       report the impact simulation starting from 31 December 2015, hence reducing
                   the simulation to the reduced time horizon.
           Crucially, the length of the reported simulation should not be less than the reduced
           time horizon. Had the model change been approved in 2016, the institution would
           have needed to engage with its JST to decide on an appropriate way forward.
           Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                                                      51

Waiver for immaterial rating     To simplify the treatment of rating systems with low materiality, institutions may
systems
                                 choose to exclude a particular rating system from the quantitative impact analysis on
                                 the basis of a “low materiality waiver” 27 if both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
                                 1.    the exposure value covered by the rating system at the reference date is
                                       smaller than EUR 500 million (before the application of CCF and credit risk
                                       mitigation);
                                 2.    the sum of the RWEAs of all exposures rated with rating systems for which the
                                       institution considers to apply the waiver is no higher than 5% of the overall
                                       RWEA for credit and dilution risk calculated according to the IRBA on the
                                       highest consolidated group level.
                                 Before applying the waiver described in this paragraph and submitting the
                                 application package, institutions are asked to align with their JST on the rating
                                 systems they are considering excluding from their quantitative impact analysis.
Possibility of sampling approach While institutions are strongly encouraged to use the full range of application of a
                                 given rating system for their self-assessments, owing to portfolio specificities and/or
                                 technical constraints, it may – for some rating systems – be impossible or unduly
                                 burdensome to conduct the quantitative impact analysis on the full portfolio. For
                                 these cases, a standard sampling methodology has been defined for comparing the
                                 observed portfolio properties and variables used in the current definition of default
                                 and the new definition of default. The sampling methodology is described in
                                 Section 7.2.2.
                                 Institutions that apply the retrospective simulation on their full portfolio may ignore
                                 the guidance on sampling. Institutions with more than one rating system may choose
                                 whether or not to use the sampling approach for each rating system separately.
                                 Institutions may, in general, use their own methodology to calculate the information
                                 expected to complete the quantitative impact template, provided this does not
                                 interfere with any of the rules or directions set out in this document.
                                 In all cases, institutions are expected to submit one quantitative impact template per
                                 submitting party. The template should comprise all simulation results of all rating
                                 systems, including – where applicable – the rating systems of subsidiaries. Should a
                                 given rating system be linked to more than one definition of default, the institution
                                 should aggregate the individual impacts of the definitions of default to the level of the
                                 rating system.
                                 The quantitative impact template should be submitted using the following naming
                                 convention: “quant_impact_template_[LEICode].xlsx”, where [LEICode] denotes the
                                 LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
                                 submitting party.
                                 27
                                     Nevertheless, even in these cases, institutions are requested to complete a gap analysis template and
                                     qualitative impact analysis template.
                                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                         52

                     7.2       Methodology
                     7.2.1     General methodology
                               The objective of the quantitative impact analysis is the quantification of the effects of
                               a change in the definition of default on institutions’ PD and LGD estimates and,
                               ultimately, on their own funds requirements. These effects are driven by three main
                               elements.
                               1.     A new definition of default has an impact on the identification of the exposures
                                      to be classified as defaulted. In consequence, a new definition of default may
                                      bring about the migration of some exposures between the defaulted and non-
                                      defaulted status, which has an effect on the capital ratio. For instance,
                                      considering that the EL amounts for defaulted exposures are generally much
                                      higher than those calculated for non-defaulted exposures, 28 an increase in the
                                      number of defaulted exposures is, ceteris paribus, likely to imply higher capital
                                      absorption.
                               2.     Changes in the definition of default may affect the calibration of the regulatory
                                      risk parameter estimates used for non-defaulted exposures. For instance,
                                      assuming a constant expected economic loss, an increase in the number of
                                      defaults triggered by the new definition of default is likely to raise both the
                                      default and cure rates.
                               3.     Changes in the definition of default may influence the risk parameter estimates
                                      for defaulted exposures (LGD-in-default and expected loss best estimate,
                                      ELBE).
Scenarios of the retrospective In order to incorporate each of the above effects into the quantitative self-
simulation
                               assessment and to properly distinguish among them, a step-by-step simulation
                               aimed at collecting information for different situations and under different conditions
                               is to be used. Figure 17 depicts the scenarios to be simulated within the quantitative
                               impact analysis.
                               28
                                   It is worth mentioning that a new flow of defaulted exposures will presumably imply additional
                                   accounting provisions (individual ones instead of collective ones), which will have an effect on the profit
                                   and loss account, and consequently on own funds requirements. In this context, any positive difference
                                   between “new” EL amounts and “new” provisions shall be deduced from the institution’s capital (IRB
                                   shortfall).
                               Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                             53

Figure 17: Scenarios to be simulated within the quantitative impact analysis
                                                                                                 Granularity
                                                                 Basis of the           Sampling             Full
                                                             estimated values           approach           portfolio
                     Real portfolio before go-live
   Step 1          Figures for the historic data as of the old definition of default,  portfolio and    portfolio level
                   reference date                          old internal models         sample level
                     Simulation of go-live
   Step 2          Figures for the simulation data set     new definition of default,  sample level     portfolio level
                   applying the new definition of default  old internal models
                     Simulation of model recalibration
   Step 3          Figures according to a (fictitious)     new definition of default,  sample and       portfolio level
                   simulated recalibration after           new(ly calibrated) internal (extrapolated)
                   implementation of Step 2                models                      portfolio level
Step 1: Reporting the observed portfolio properties 29 and risk figures under the
current conditions, i.e. using the definition(s) of default currently applied and the
rating system(s) currently in use. Institutions applying the sampling approach need to
complete this step twice – once on the full range of application of the rating system
(“the portfolio”) and once on the sample(s). Institutions using their full portfolio as the
basis for the quantitative impact analysis only need to consider the full range of
application of the rating system. No simulations need to be performed at this stage.
Step 2: Computing the (observed) default and cure rates based on the (simulated)
new definition of default, so that the classification (“flag”) of each exposure as
defaulted or non-defaulted follows the new rules. Depending on the approach an
institution chooses to use, the self-assessment is either applied to the full portfolio or
to the sample. This step simulates the implementation of the new Guidelines and
ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation
without an actual adjustment of the models (i.e. still using the risk parameter
calibration of the internal models currently in place).
Step 3: In addition to the classification of exposures in line with the new definition of
default envisaged in the previous step, in this step the parameter estimates have to
be hypothetically adjusted to reflect the new definition of default. Institutions applying
the sampling approach need to complete this step on the sample(s) and
subsequently extrapolate their results to the full portfolio; 30 a simulation of the new
definition of default on the full portfolio is not necessary. Institutions using their full
portfolio as the basis for the quantitative impact analysis once more only need to
consider the full range of application of the rating system. This step simulates a
recalibration of the models based on the new Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU)
29
    As detailed in Section 7.3.2, institutions are generally expected to apply the methodology that would be
    used for model development or calibration.
30
    The method used to extrapolate the RWEA and other parameters should be consistent with the
    principles set out in Article 3(2)(b) of DR 529/2014.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                                       54

                                 YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation. Institutions are, as a rule,
                                 expected to apply the same methods to estimate the results in Step 3 for all of the
                                 rating systems within the scope of the self-assessment (cf. Chapter 2). The methods
                                 applied should be documented within the quantitative impact template. Irrespective
                                 of the methods applied for their estimation, the adjusted risk parameters should
                                 comply with the minimum levels set in the CRR for the relevant risk parameters,
                                 namely:
                                 •      the adjusted PD of all exposures shall be at least 0.03% (Articles 160(1) and
                                        163(1) of the CRR) for all exposures except for exposures to central
                                        governments and central banks;
                                 •      the adjusted exposure weighted average LGD shall be at least 10% for all retail
                                        exposures secured by residential property not benefiting from guarantees from
                                        central governments and shall be at least 15% for all retail exposures secured
                                        by commercial immovable property not benefiting from guarantees from central
                                        governments (Article 164(4) of the CRR).
                                 If sampling is applied, institutions are expected to conduct Step 1 twice and
                                 extrapolate the results of Step 3 to their full portfolio. Otherwise, institutions are
                                 expected to carry out each step only once.
Setting the first default status When simulating the impact on the time horizons as set out in Section 7.1,
                                 institutions may, for some rating systems, encounter difficulties when setting the very
                                 first default status (e.g. the status on 31 December 2014) for the simulation of the
                                 new definition of default without having a simulation before that date. For the sake of
                                 simplicity, institutions may in this case use the default status according to the old
                                 definition of default to “approximate” the very first status. Alternatively, institutions
                                 may simulate the first status by prior simulation of the new definition of default. As
                                 set out in Section 7.3, the approach adopted to resolve this difficulty should be
                                 documented appropriately, including an insight into whether and to what extent
                                 institutions expect a bias in the sample by applying the above-mentioned option.
                                 When carrying out the simulations, institutions are expected to include all future
                                 requirements stipulated in the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
                                 conjunction with the Delegated Regulation, as well as those optional practices from
                                 the Guidelines that they intend to adopt as part of the new definition of default. In
                                 addition, institutions are expected to provide as realistic a simulation as possible.
                                 Notwithstanding these guidelines, institutions are not expected to invest undue effort
                                 in assessing unlikeliness to pay requirements manually for retail exposures if they
                                 can prove that manual processes play a minor role in the self-assessment of default
                                 events for these exposures in daily business operations. This should, however, also
                                 be documented appropriately (cf. Section 7.3).
                                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis            55

                       7.2.2         Sampling methodology
Institutions are strongly encouraged If an institution decides to use a sampling approach, the sampling should be random
to use the full portfolio for all
simulations and calculations. If an  and stratified according to the rating grade or pool of the exposures, as the rating
institution does not use sampling,   grade or pool is generally an indicator of closeness to default. All sampling
this section can be neglected.
                                     considerations should be based on the full portfolio, i.e. sampling should be applied
                                     relative to the range of application of a given rating system. Upon request,
                                     institutions are expected to be able to demonstrate that the sampled exposures are
                                     representative for the full portfolio.
                                     In practice, based on their default status given the current definition of default and
                                     current rating grade, both as at 31 December 2016, 31 exposures should be split into
                                     the following three groups (strata) in order to classify the obligors (for this purpose
                                     institutions should apply the estimated PD as used for the calculation of risk weights
                                     as at 31 December 2016 according to Articles 153 and 154 of the CRR):
                                     1) “non-defaulted – low risk”, i.e. rating grades or pools with PD < 1%;
                                     2) “non-defaulted – high risk”, i.e. rating grades or pools with PD = 1% and
                                     PD < 100%;
                                     3) “defaulted”, i.e. PD = 100%.
                                     The assignment to groups based on information as at 31 December 2016 is initially
                                     applied in order to properly sample each stratum with the minimum sample size set
                                     out below. Once a sample of obligors 32 has been chosen, institutions are expected to
                                     use the same sample of obligors for the full time horizon underlying the quantitative
                                     impact analysis.
                                     The simulation results should be reported at stratum level for each year included in
                                     the analysis. This implies that strata should also be considered for dates before 31
                                     December 2016. Institutions are expected to assign each obligor to one of the three
                                     groups on each year-end date of interest and to keep the obligor’s status until the
                                     next year-end date. Details of the reporting structure are set out in Section 7.3.
                                     To summarise, the sample is to be set up exactly once, in compliance with the
                                     minimum sampling requirements, as at 31 December 2016 only. Institutions are then
                                     expected to use the same sample for all previous and following observation dates. 33
                                     However, each obligor should be dynamically reassigned to one of the strata,
                                     depending on the status and PD of the obligor at each of the observation dates.
Example 12
                                     31
                                         This date is independent of the time horizon for which the impact analysis is performed, even though
                                         some exposures may be unavailable for earlier observation dates.
                                     32
                                         Depending on the rating system, institutions may also sample by facility if defaults are recognised
                                         independently for different facilities of the same obligor. For simplicity, only the case of obligors is
                                         considered in the following.
                                     33
                                         This may lead to smaller samples in other parts of the sample period, as obligors observed as at 31
                                         December 2016 may have not yet been present in all or part of the first years of the period and/or may
                                         not still be present as at 31 December 2017.
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                               56

                              Institution A sets up a sample for a specific rating system. The institution decides to
                              use a three-year horizon for the sample (i.e. 31 December 2014 to 31 December
                              2017). The sample is determined, with respect to the minimum sampling rules, as at
                              31 December 2016. Once the sample has been determined, it is also used for all
                              other observation dates, i.e. 31 December 2014, 31 December 2015 and 31
                              December 2017.
                              Assume that obligor B is part of the institution’s sample. As at 31 December 2016,
                              the obligor had a PD of 2%, rendering it part of the high risk stratum. The obligor
                              thus contributes to the minimum sampling requirements of this stratum; the criteria
                              are described below. Obligor B will then automatically (also) be part of the sample for
                              all other observation dates, if available. Assume that, as at 31 December 2015, the
                              obligor had a PD of only 0.5%. In this case, even though the obligor is part of the
                              high risk stratum when setting up the sample, as at 31 December 2015 it should be
                              assigned to the low risk stratum. Moreover, if the obligor was not part of the portfolio
                              as at 31 December 2014, it would not be part of the sample on that specific date.
Minimum sampling requirements Exposures in the worst rating grades or pools as well as defaulted exposures should
                              be sampled more heavily in order to observe more significant effects during the
                              simulation. Therefore, a minimum sample size is imposed for each stratum. As a first
                              step, a sampling ratio a is considered, which represents the minimum share of total
                              observations in each stratum for which the impact analysis is expected to be
                              conducted. Different values of the sampling ratio are specified depending on the
                              stratum and the general exposure type (retail vs non-retail). Where a specific stratum
                              contains a small number of observations, considering only the minimum share of
                              observations may lead to unreasonably small samples. To avoid such instances, an
                              absolute minimum N_min of observations to be included in each stratum is defined.
                              As is the case for the relative threshold, this (total) threshold depends on the general
                              exposure type (retail vs non-retail).
                              Based on this structure, the sample size for each stratum as at 31 December 2016
                              should be determined as follows:
                              1.    calculate the total number of observations N in the portfolio for the given
                                    stratum;
                              2.    the sample size should be equal to or exceed max(N_min; N × a);
                              3.    if the total number of observations N lies below N_min, then the total number of
                                    observations, N, should be considered.
                              Applications involving samples that do not meet these minimum sampling
                              requirements will be considered incomplete.
                              The values to be applied for the sampling ratio a and the absolute minimum N_min
                              depending on the stratum and the general exposure type (retail vs non-retail) are
                              summarised in Table 1.
                              Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis         57

    Table 1: Minimum sampling requirements
                                         a                                  N_min
                            retail            non-retail             retail        non-retail
    Low risk                25%                  40%                4500             100
    High risk               30%                  45%                6000             115
    Defaulted               35%                  50%                   0              0
7.3 Guidance on the template
    The quantitative impact template is an Excel workbook that comprises a total of
    seven sheets:
    •    General Information;
    •    Full_Input (date-specific);
    •    Full_Input (period-based);
    •    Sample_Input (date-specific);
    •    Sample_Input (period-based);
    •    Transition Matrix;
    •    Guidance.
    Sheet “General Information” asks for basic reference data on the supervised entity at
    the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party. For the purposes of
    transparency and traceability, the simulation results based on the full portfolio and
    those under the stratified sampling approach are recorded in different sheets. While
    Sheets “Full_Input” (date-specific)” and “Full_Input (period-based)” are dedicated to
    the simulation results per rating system when using the full portfolio, Sheets
    “Sample_Input” (date-specific)” and “Sample_Input (period-based)” are devoted
    exclusively to the results per rating system where sampling has been used. Sheet
    “Transition Matrix” asks for detailed information on the status transitions of the
    relevant obligors. The last sheet, Sheet “Guidance”, does not have input fields; it
    provides information on how to complete the other sheets within the template only.
    Detailed guidance on how to fill each input field is provided in the following
    subsections.
    Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis            58

7.3.1 Sheet “General Information”
      In order to link the submission to the gap and qualitative impact analyses, in Sheet
      “General Information”, institutions are expected to provide the name and LEI code of
      the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
      Besides these mandatory fields, at the bottom of the sheet, institutions may provide
      free-text comments. Institutions choosing to apply the first default status using the
      old definition of default (cf. Section 7.2.1) should use this field to provide an insight
      into whether and to what extent they expect a bias in the sample due to this
      approximation. All other institutions should use the field to explain the approach they
      adopted to resolve this issue, providing an appropriate level of detail to enable the
      assessment of its suitability. If an institution uses different approaches for different
      rating systems, it should make clear which rating systems were subjected to which
      treatment.
      Figure 18: Quantitative impact template – Sheet "General Information"
                                             Definition of Default Quantitative Impact Analysis - General Information
                                                                                                                Template Version: 1.01
      Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
      submitting party:
      LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
      submitting party:
                                                  General / additional comments to the answers provided herein
7.3.2 Sheets “Full_Input (date-specific)”, “Full_Input (period-based)”,
      “Sample_Input (date-specific)”, and “Sample_Input (period-based)”
      Institutions are expected to clearly differentiate – using dedicated sheets to report
      the corresponding results – between simulations based on a sampling approach and
      simulations based on their full portfolio. They should also separate date-specific data
      from period-based data (cf. Section 7.1). For this reason, the template contains a
      total of four different sheets relating to the simulation results: Sheet “Full_Input (date-
      specific)”, Sheet “Full_Input (period-based)”, Sheet “Sample_Input (date-specific)”
      and Sheet “Sample_Input (period-based)”. Both “sets” of sheets (i.e. “Full_Input” and
      “Sample_Input”) ask for the same type of information. While Sheets “Full_Input
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                                                   59

(date-specific)” and “Full_Input (period-based)” should be used to record the results
derived from simulations using the full portfolio as their basis, Sheets “Sample_Input
(date-specific)” and “Sample_Input (period-based)” should be used for those rating
systems for which sampling was applied.
Each rating system can only be part of one or the other set of sheets. However,
institutions may use both sets within the quantitative impact template to report their
simulation results, i.e. they may fill in the sheets labelled “Full_Input (*)” for some
rating systems and the sheets labelled “Sample_Input (*)” for others. If sampling is
applied, institutions need to comply with the rules set out in Section 7.2.2.
It is expected that institutions will draw their results for the date-specific and period-
based data from the same base simulation or data (irrespective of whether they
make use of the sampling approach or not). In all cases, this information should be
consistent for any given rating system.
Institutions are asked to provide the results for each simulation step separately and
on a year-by-year basis. If they chose to adopt a sampling approach, they are also
asked to distinguish between the sampling groups set out in Section 7.2.2. Aside
from the additional granularity in the case of sampling, institutions should – in
general – report nearly identical information across the approaches and for each of
the following simulation steps, as depicted in Figure 17:
•      Step 1 – Current definition of default, current model. All figures should be
       reported as at the corresponding observation date.
•      Step 2 – New definition of default, current model. All figures should be reported
       based on the simulated application of the new definition of default while keeping
       the models to estimate PD and LGD constant (i.e. using the current models).
•      Step 3 – New definition of default, simulated model. All figures should be
       reported based on a fictitious recalibration of the models 34 aimed at embedding
       the effects triggered by the new definition of default. Institutions should use the
       same definition of default as in Step 2 (i.e. the new definition of default). When
       sampling is applied, the variables requested in this step should not only be
       reported at the sample level, but the results should also be extrapolated to the
       full portfolio in an unbiased manner.
       Institutions need to summarise the methodology they used to arrive at their
       results for Step 3.
In particular, for each of these steps, institutions are asked to report, for each rating
system, the following information:
34
     Institutions are not expected to actually recalibrate their models. Instead, institutions should try to
     identify fair calibration levels for their risk parameters. Institutions may use approximated techniques,
     for example by scaling the risk parameters, in order to calculate adjusted values at obligor or facility
     level. Institutions should take into account that a real recalibration would include more years than the
     simulated horizon (which may also have an impact on the calibration level). In addition, for the purpose
     of estimating the levels in Step 3, institutions should only include margins of conservatism already in
     place without introducing any additional (i.e. artificial) margins of conservatism.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                                60

•    observation date (date-specific sheets only);
•    observation period (period-based sheets only);
•    stratum (Sheets “Sample_Input (*)” only);
•    number of non-defaulted obligors (Sheet “Full_Input (date-specific)” only);
•    number of non-defaulted obligors [low risk] (Sheet “Sample_Input (date-
     specific)” only);
•    number of non-defaulted obligors [high risk] (Sheet “Sample_Input (date-
     specific)” only);
•    number of defaulted obligors (date-specific sheets only);
•    EAD of non-defaulted exposures (date-specific sheets only);
•    EAD of defaulted exposures (date-specific sheets only);
•    PD (date-specific sheets only);
•    LGD (date-specific sheets only);
•    EL amounts (date-specific sheets only);
•    EL amounts for defaulted exposures (date-specific sheets only);
•    RWEA (date-specific sheets only);
•    explanation of how the simulated PD in Step 3 is derived with respect to the
     results derived in Step 2 (date-specific sheets only);
•    explanation of how the simulated LGD in Step 3 is derived with respect to the
     results derived in Step 2 (date-specific sheets only);
•    ODR (period-based sheets only);
•    cure rate (period-based sheets only).
When using a sampling approach, not all of the information included in this list can
reasonably be provided for all levels of granularity and all steps. In order to highlight
which fields need to be completed for which stratum, Sheets “Sample_Input (date-
specific)” and “Sample_Input (period-based)” explicitly highlight the fields (in grey)
where no input is expected.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis         61

                                     Figure 19: Illustrative example of the quantitative impact analysis in Sheet
                                     “Sample_Input (date-specific)”
                                                 Identifier                                                                                                Step 1 [C
                                                                                          Number of non- Number of non-                           EAD of non-
                                                          Observation                                                              Number of                       E
                                        Rating system                        Stratum     defaulted obligors defaulted obligors                      defaulted
                                                             date                                                              defaulted obligors
                                                                                             (low risk)         (high risk)                        exposures
                                             010             011                013              021                022                023             024
                                             RS5                      Sample (low risk)
                                             RS5                      Sample (high risk)
                                             RS5                      Sample (defaulted)
                                             RS5                      Full portfolio
Input 1: Rating system               In the column with identifier 010, institutions are expected to provide the identifier of
                                     the rating system being assessed, as assigned/recorded in the registry template.
Input 2a: Observation date           The column with identifier 011 should contain the observation date at which the date-
                                     specific data are estimated. The observation date is expected in the date-specific
                                     sheets only.
Input 2b: Observation period         The column with identifier 012 should be filled with the year over which simulation
                                     results are considered to determine the ODR and cure rate. For example, to
                                     determine the ODR and cure rate for 2017, all defaults that would occur during 2017
                                     should be considered and the observation period to be entered is 2017. The
                                     observation period is expected in the period-based sheets only.
Input 3: Stratum                     The column with identifier 013 should contain the sampling group for which the
(Sheets “Sample_Input (*)” only)
                                     quantitative results are provided. The stratum only needs to be provided within
                                     Sheets “Sample_Input (date-specific)” and “Sample_Input (period-based)” for
                                     institutions having resorted to a sampling approach for at least one rating system.
                                     For each rating system considered under the sampling approach and for each year,
                                     institutions are expected to provide information for each stratum. In other words, for
                                     each rating system and observation date or period, institutions need to complete four
                                     rows, each one of them corresponding to one of the four options presented in a
                                     dropdown menu, namely “Sample (low risk)”, “Sample (high risk)”, “Sample
                                     (defaulted)” and “Full Portfolio”. The input in this field determines which of the
                                     expected quantitative data should be provided. The meaning of each stratum is
                                     defined in Section 7.2.
Input 4: Number of non-defaulted     The input of the information on the number of non-defaulted obligors that is
obligors
                                     requested differs between the two “sets” of reporting sheets.
- Sheet “Full_Input (date-specific)” In Sheet “Full_Input (date-specific)”, institutions are asked to complete the columns
                                     with identifiers 020 and 040 by entering the total number of non-defaulted obligors
                                     within the range of application of the rating system at the observation date. The
                                     figure sought in the relevant fields is given by the number of all obligors covered by
                                     the given rating system that are not defaulted as at the observation date (e.g. 31
                                     December 2016). Entries in this field are limited to non-negative integers (including
                                     zero).
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                                              62

- Sheet “Sample_Input (date-  In Sheet “Sample_Input (date-specific)”, in turn, the number of non-defaulted
 specific)”:
  Sample (low risk) only      obligors is requested by stratum. The column with identifier 021 is a modification of
                              the column with identifier 020 in Sheet “Full_Input (date-specific)” for low risk
                              obligors (according to the rules set out in Section 7.2.2). The figure sought in this
                              field is given by the number of all obligors within the respective combination of rating
                              system, observation date and stratum that are not defaulted as at the observation
                              date (e.g. 31 December 2016) and are classified as low risk. Entries in this field are
                              limited to non-negative integers (including zero). The values provided in this field
                              should give an insight into the sampling ratio and the relative number of obligors
                              used in the sample when compared with the portfolio.
  Sample (high risk) only     Likewise, the column with identifier 022 seeks the number of non-defaulted obligors
                              for high risk obligors (according to the rules set out in Section 7.2.2).
                              The highlighting used throughout the worksheet clarifies which figures need to be
                              provided for each stratum, 35 e.g. the number of high risk obligors is only sought for
                              the “Sample (high risk)” stratum. Note that for the “Full portfolio” stratum, both
                              columns (identifiers 021 and 022) need to be completed.
Input 5: Number of defaulted  Institutions are asked to use the columns with identifiers 23 and 41 to provide the
obligors
                              total number of defaulted obligors within the range of application of the rating
                              system, both for the observation date, and – if sampling is applied (cf. Table 2 below)
                              – for the sample group. The figure sought in these fields is given by the number of all
                              obligors within the respective group that are in default as at the observation date
                              (e.g. 31 December 2016). Entries in these fields are limited to non-negative integers
                              (including zero). The number of defaulted obligors is expected in the date-specific
                              sheets only.
Input 6: EAD of non-defaulted In the columns with identifiers 24 and 42, institutions are asked to provide the total
exposures
                              sum of EAD (in EUR millions) of non-defaulted obligors within the range of
                              application of the rating system, both for the observation date, and – if sampling is
                              applied – for the sample group. The figure sought in these fields is given by the sum
                              of the exposures of all obligors within the respective group that are not in default as
                              at the observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016). Entries in these fields are limited
                              to non-negative numbers (including zero). The EAD of non-defaulted exposures is
                              required in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 7: EAD of defaulted     In a similar vein, in the columns with identifiers 25 and 43, institutions are asked to
exposures
                              provide the total sum of EAD (in EUR millions) of defaulted obligors within the range
                              of application of the rating system, both for the observation date and – if sampling is
                              applied – for the sample group. The figure sought in these fields is given by the sum
                              of the exposures of all obligors within the respective group that are in default as at
                              the observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016). Entries in these fields are limited to
                              non-negative numbers (including zero). The EAD of defaulted exposures is expected
                              in the date-specific sheets only.
                              35
                                  In the case of sampling, the simulation expected for Step 2 is only requested for the strata. As a
                                  consequence, the entry expected for this step in the column with identifier 040 does not distinguish
                                  among the strata (cf. the guidance for the column with identifier 040 in Sheet “Full_Input” above).
                              Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                           63

Input 8: PD                       Institutions are asked to use the columns with identifiers 26, 44 and 60 to provide the
                                  (simple) average PD of all non-defaulted obligors within the respective rating system,
                                  both for the observation date and – if sampling is applied – for the sample group.
                                  Averages are calculated such that all obligors are weighted equally, irrespective of
                                  their exposure amounts. Both the PD and the defaulted status per obligor should be
                                  taken as at the corresponding observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016) and
                                  correspond to the particular step of the retrospective simulation. Institutions are
                                  asked to use the same probabilities of default to determine the average PD of all
                                  non-defaulted obligors that are used for their calculations of own funds requirements.
                                  In the column with identifier 60 this relates to the simulated average PD that would
                                  be used for the calculation of own funds requirements following a recalibration.
                                  Entries in these fields are limited to non-negative numbers (including zero). The PD
                                  is expected in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 9: LGD                      The columns with identifiers 27, 45 and 61 should contain the (simple) average
                                  estimated LGD of all non-defaulted obligors within the respective rating system, both
                                  for the observation date and – if sampling is applied – for the sample group.
                                  Averages are calculated such that all obligors are weighted equally, irrespective of
                                  their exposure amounts. Both the LGD and the defaulted status per obligor should
                                  be taken as at the corresponding observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016) and
                                  correspond to the particular step of the retrospective simulation. Institutions are
                                  asked to use the same LGD values to determine the average LGD of all non-
                                  defaulted obligors that are used for their calculations of own funds requirements. In
                                  the column with identifier 61 this relates to the simulated average LGD that would be
                                  used for the calculation of own funds requirements following a recalibration. If an
                                  institution does not use own estimates of the LGD for the respective rating system,
                                  the field in the corresponding row of this column should be left empty. Entries in
                                  these fields are limited to non-negative numbers (including zero). The LGD is
                                  expected in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 10: EL amount               The columns with identifiers 28, 46 and 62 should in turn contain the sum of all EL
                                  amounts (in EUR millions) of all non-defaulted obligors within the respective rating
                                  system, both for the observation date and – if sampling is applied – for the sample
                                  group. Both the EL and the defaulted status per obligor should be taken as at the
                                  corresponding observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016) and correspond to the
                                  particular step of the retrospective simulation. Entries in these fields are limited to
                                  non-negative numbers (including zero). The EL amounts are expected in the date-
                                  specific sheets only.
Input 11: EL amount for defaulted Correspondingly, institutions should use the columns with identifiers 29, 47 and 63 to
exposures
                                  provide the sum of all EL amounts (in EUR millions; cf. Article 158 of the CRR) of all
                                  obligors in default within the respective rating system, both for the observation date
                                  and – if sampling is applied – for the sample group. Both the EL and the defaulted
                                  status per obligor should be taken as at the corresponding observation date (e.g. 31
                                  December 2016) and correspond to the particular step of the retrospective
                                  simulation. If an institution uses own estimates of the LGD for the respective rating
                                  system, the sum of all EL amounts should be based on the ELBE for the defaulted
                                  exposures. Entries in these fields are limited to non-negative numbers (including
                                  Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis          64

                                     zero). The EL amounts for defaulted exposures are expected in the date-specific
                                     sheets only.
Input 12: RWEA                       Finally, the columns with identifiers 30, 48 and 64 should be used to provide the sum
                                     of all RWEAs (in EUR millions) of all obligors/facilities within the respective rating
                                     system, both for the observation date and – if sampling is applied – for the sample
                                     group. Both the RWEAs and the defaulted status should be taken as at the
                                     corresponding observation date (e.g. 31 December 2016) and correspond to the
                                     particular step of the retrospective simulation. Hence, institutions are asked to use
                                     the same risk-weight function and the same input parameters (potentially subject to
                                     simulated adjustments in the corresponding steps) that are used for their calculation
                                     of own funds requirements. Entries in these fields are limited to non-negative
                                     numbers (including zero). The RWEA is expected in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 13: Please provide an          The column with identifier 065 provides a free-text field in which institutions are
explanation of how the simulated
PD in Step 3 is derived with respect asked to summarise the general approach they used to estimate the average PD in
to the results derived in Step 2     Step 3 based on the simulation results derived in Step 2.
                                     If the methodology remains identical over time, it is sufficient to provide one
                                     explanation per rating system. The explanation may be provided for a single
                                     observation date (e.g. 31 December 2017) and may be left blank for other years for
                                     the same rating system. This information is expected in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 14: Please provide an          Likewise, the column with identifier 066 provides a free-text field in which institutions
explanation of how the simulated
LGD in Step 3 is derived with        are asked to summarise the general approach used to estimate the average LGD in
respect to the results derived in    Step 3 based on the simulation results derived in Step 2. If an institution does not
Step 2
                                     use own estimates of the LGD for their calculation of own funds requirements for the
                                     respective rating system, the field in the corresponding row of this column should be
                                     left empty.
                                     If the methodology remains identical over time, it is sufficient to provide one
                                     explanation per rating system. The explanation may be provided for a single
                                     observation date (e.g. 31 December 2017) and may be left blank for other years for
                                     the same rating system. This information is expected in the date-specific sheets only.
Input 15: ODR                        The columns with identifiers 51 and 53 should contain the ODR within the respective
                                     rating system, observation period and – if sampling is applied – the sample group. To
                                     determine the ODR, institutions are expected to use the methodology that would be
                                     used for model development or calibration. Entries in these fields are limited to non-
                                     negative numbers (including zero). The ODR is expected in the period-based sheets
                                     only.
Input 16: Cure rate                  The columns with identifiers 52 and 54 should contain the observed cure rate within
                                     the respective rating system, observation period and – if sampling is applied – the
                                     sample group. To determine the observed cure rates, institutions are expected to use
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis          65

the methodology that would be used for model development or calibration. 36 Since
the simulated time horizon is limited, institutions may not detect all cures. In any
case, the time span considered for observing cures should be consistent among the
different steps. If an institution does not use own estimates of the LGD for the
calculation of own funds requirements for the respective rating system, the field in
the corresponding row in this column should be left empty. Entries in these fields are
limited to non-negative numbers (including zero). The observed cure rate is expected
in the period-based sheets only.
For those institutions adopting a sampling approach, Table 2 provides a summary of
which information needs to be provided for each stratum and simulation step.
36
    Where institutions do not have a definition of “cure rate”, they should use the number of facilities (or
    obligors) – out of those that defaulted within the observation period – that were defaulted at the
    observation date but are no longer defaulted 12 months after the observation date, divided by the total
    number of defaulted facilities (or obligors).
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                               66

Table 2: Information to be provided for each stratum and simulation step
                 Stratum       Sample             Sample           Sample        Full
 Metric                       (low risk)        (high risk)      (defaulted)   portfolio
 Number of non-
 defaulted obligors              Step 1              –                –         Step 1
 (low risk)
 Number of non-
 defaulted obligors                 –             Step 1              –         Step 1
 (high risk)
 Number of non-
                                 Step 2           Step 2              –           –
 defaulted obligors
 Number of defaulted                                               Step 1
                                    –                –                          Step 1
 obligors                                                          Step 2
 EAD of non-defaulted            Step 1           Step 1
                                                                      –         Step 1
 exposures                       Step 2           Step 2
 EAD defaulted                                                     Step 1
                                    –                –                            –
 exposures                                                         Step 2
                                 Step 1           Step 1
 ODR                                                                  –         Step 1
                                 Step 2           Step 2
                                                                   Step 1
 Cure rate                          –                –                          Step 1
                                                                   Step 2
                                 Step 1           Step 1
                                                                                Step 1
 PD                              Step 2           Step 2              –
                                                                                Step 3
                                 Step 3           Step 3
                                 Step 1           Step 1
                                                                                Step 1
 LGD                             Step 2           Step 2              –
                                                                                Step 3
                                 Step 3           Step 3
                                 Step 1           Step 1
                                                                                Step 1
 EL                              Step 2           Step 2              –
                                                                                Step 3
                                 Step 3           Step 3
                                                                   Step 1
                                                                                Step 1
 ELBE                               –                –             Step 2
                                                                                Step 3
                                                                   Step 3
                                 Step 1           Step 1           Step 1
                                                                                Step 1
 RWEA                            Step 2           Step 2           Step 2
                                                                                Step 3
                                 Step 3           Step 3           Step 3
Figure 20 provides a summary of all information to be provided within a given
simulation step.
Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis           67

      Figure 20: Information to be provided per simulation step
7.3.3 Sheet “Transition Matrix”
      While Sheets “Full_Input” and “Sample_Input” strive to capture the quantitative
      impact on the relevant portfolio properties and risk parameters for each simulation
      step, Sheet “Transition Matrix” investigates in detail the status transitions that occur
      during simulation Step 2, i.e. transitions resulting from the evolution of the definition
      of default. Institutions are expected to be able to assign all obligors within their
      portfolio or sample in Step 2 to a unique cell of the transition matrix depicted in
      Figure 21.
      Figure 21: General structure of the transition matrix to be provided in Sheet
      “Transition Matrix”
                                                   New DoD
              Counts            Will not        Will      Will not        Will       Sum
                                default       default      cure           cure
                                 (ND)          (WD)        (NC)          (WC)
                    Will not
                     default    NDND          NDWD        NDNC          NDWC       ND(old)
                      (ND)
                       Will
                     default    WDND          WDWD        WDNC         WDWC        WD(old)
                      (WD)
        Old DoD
                    Will not
                       cure     NCND          NCWD        NCNC          NCWC       NC(old)
                      (NC)
                       Will
                       cure     WCND          WCWD        WCNC         WCWC        WC(old)
                      (WC)
               Sum             ND(new)       WD(new)     NC(new)       WC(new)        S
      More precisely, based on its status as per the old and new definition of default on a
      given observation date, institutions are asked to allocate each obligor to one of the
      following four categories:
      •     Will not default (ND);
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis          68

                      •     Will default (WD);
                      •     Will not cure (NC);
                      •     Will cure (WC).
                      The four categories are defined as follows:
Will not default (ND) An obligor should be classified as “Will not default (ND)” for a specific definition of
                      default and a given date if the obligor is not in default at the corresponding
                      observation date and does not default within the next 12 months.
Will default (WD)     An obligor should be classified as “Will default (WD)” for a specific definition of
                      default and a given date if the obligor is not in default at the corresponding
                      observation date, but will default within the next 12 months.
Will not cure (NC)    An obligor should be classified as “Will not cure (NC)” for a specific definition of
                      default and a given date if the obligor is in default at the corresponding observation
                      date and is also in default after 12 months.
Will cure (WC)        An obligor should be classified as “Will cure (WC)” for a specific definition of default
                      and a given date if the obligor is in default at the corresponding observation date and
                      no longer in default after 12 months.
                      After each obligor has been assigned to one of the categories for both the old and
                      the new definitions of default, they can be assigned to one of the cells within the
                      transition matrix.
                      Apart from two columns seeking reference information, i.e. the identifier of the rating
                      system being assessed (column with identifier 010) and the 12-month period over
                      which the transitions are considered (column with identifier 020), 37 the columns of
                      Sheet “Transition Matrix” correspond to one of the cells depicted in Figure 21. As
                      their entry, institutions are asked to report the total number of obligors per cell of the
                      transitions matrix.
Example 13            As an example, field NCWD should be filled with the number of obligors that are in
                      default at the observation date according to the old definition of default and are also
                      in default after 12 months (NC). However, according to the new definition of default
                      these obligors are not in default, but will be defaulting within the next 12 months
                      (WD).
                      Institutions are expected to ensure that the sums reported in Sheet “Transition
                      Matrix” correspond to the values reported in Sheets “Full_Input” and “Sample_Input”.
                      In particular, it is assumed that the following relationships will hold:
                      •     ND(old) + WD(old) = Column 020 in Sheet “Full_Input”, or alternatively,
                            ND(old) + WD(old) = Column 021 + Column 022 in Sheet “Sample_Input”;
                      37
                          In accordance with the period-based entries provided in the other sheets of the quantitative impact
                          template, an entry of “2016” refers to the period between the observation dates 31 December 2015 and
                          31 December 2016 (cf. Figure 16).
                      Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis                          69

      •    NC(old) + WC(old) = Column 023 in Sheets “Full_Input” and “Sample_Input”
           respectively;
      •    ND(new) + WD(new) = Column 040 in Sheets “Full_Input” and “Sample_Input”
           respectively;
      •    NC(new) + WC(new) = Column 041 in Sheets “Full_Input” and “Sample_Input”
           respectively.
      Any deviations from these presumptions should be explained clearly within the
      comments field in Sheet “General Information”.
7.3.4 Sheet “Guidance”
      The sheet “Guidance” comprises explanations on how to complete the template. The
      information presented in it is a summary of the guidance presented in this document.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Quantitative impact analysis   70

           8   Action plan
               Another relevant component of the application package, besides the gap and impact
               analyses to be submitted by institutions, is the action plan (cf. Figure 1 in Chapter 1).
               It aims to:
                           (i)  present a timeline showing the implementation dates of all activities
                                that need to be performed in order to allow for the full implementation
                                of the new default definition and, if applicable, the calibration of the
                                regulatory risk parameters;
                           (ii) identify dependencies between sequential activities.
               A dedicated template (“action plan template”), attached to this document, sets out
               the structure of institutions’ activities. Institutions should ensure that the action plan is
               consistent with the information disclosed in the gap template, the qualitative impact
               template, and the quantitative impact template. This means that the activities
               included in the action plan should cover the changes and implementation plan
               described in the columns with identifier 040 on Sheets “T1”, “T2”, “T4”, or “T5” of the
               gap template on the requirements of the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU)
               YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the Delegated Regulation and/or in the columns with
               identifier 050 of Sheets “T3” and “T6” of the gap template relating to the optional
               practices in the Guidelines that institutions are planning to apply when changing the
               definition of default. However, institutions may, subject to their organisational
               structure and implementation strategy, appropriately group certain similar activities if
               their implementation is closely linked.
               This chapter provides details on the level and depth of information expected to be
               provided in the action plan and offers guidance on completing the action plan
               template.
Example 14     Submitting Party A has a centralised implementation plan in the sense that all legal
               entities within the group follow the same plan and timeline. This institution lists all
               functional and technical activities attached to this plan within the template.
               In contrast, submitting Party B has a more decentralised implementation plan, where
               the same activities are performed, yet different legal entities follow different timelines.
               To capture all activities to be performed within the group, submitting Party B may, for
               instance, group the activities by each group of legal entities that share similar
               implementation timelines.
           8.1 General guidance
               As a general rule, the action plan should be completed by the supervised entity at
               the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party. It is therefore expected
               to comprise the consolidated activities across the full organisational structure of the
               Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                             71

      submitting party. Consequently, each application package contains one unique
      action plan comprising the activities.
      As actions and timelines may evolve during the course of implementation, upon
      submission of the application package the action plan may be preliminary in some
      details and deadlines. Nevertheless, institutions should – at least on a high level – be
      able to provide an insight into how they intend to schedule the activities necessary to
      implement the new definition of default and (approximately) how long each activity
      will take. A revised version of the action plan can be submitted during the course of
      the approval process.
      Institutions may include in the action plan all types of activities that are closely linked
      to the implementation of the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in
      conjunction with the Delegated Regulation. If this implementation requires activities
      that are also closely linked to other regulatory products, institutions are free to list
      those activities as well.
      The action plan template should be submitted using the following naming
      convention: “action_plan_template_[LEICode].xlsx”, where [LEICode] denotes the
      LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
      submitting party.
8.2   Guidance on the template
      The action plan template is an Excel workbook consisting of three sheets:
      •      General Information;
      •      Action Plan;
      •      Guidance.
      While Sheet “General Information” asks for basic reference data on the supervised
      entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party, Sheet “Action
      Plan” compiles a list of all implementation activities envisaged by institutions
      alongside the estimated duration for their completion, ultimately rendering them fully
      compliant with the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction
      with the Delegated Regulation. Sheet “Guidance” does not have input fields and is
      for information purposes only. Detailed guidance on how to fill each input field is
      provided in the following subsections.
8.2.1 Sheet “General Information”
      In order to link the action plan to all other templates, in Sheet “General Information”,
      institutions are expected to provide the name and LEI code of the supervised entity
      at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                            72

      Besides these mandatory fields, at the bottom of the sheet, institutions may provide
      free-text comments.
      Figure 22: Action Plan template – Sheet “General Information”
                                                                  Action Plan - General Information
                                                                                                              Template Version: 1.01
       Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
       submitting party:
       LEI of the hsupervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the
       submitting party:
                                                  General / additional comments to the answers provided herein
8.2.2 Sheet “Action Plan”
      The action plan should comprise all completed, ongoing, and envisaged activities
      necessary to achieve full compliance with the new definition of default, i.e. all
      activities relevant to changes in the functional processes, documentation and/or IT
      systems pursuant to Article 143(3) of the CRR. To facilitate a well-founded
      supervisory decision process, institutions should – where these are already known –
      also include relevant sub-activities/tasks.
      In order to structure the action plan and ensure a sequential identification of relevant
      activities, the template distinguishes among the following categories:
      •         A – Changes to the definition of default (according to macro areas as set out in
                the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with the
                Delegated Regulation);
      •         B – Changes in the calibration of the regulatory risk parameters used for non-
                defaulted and defaulted exposures;
      •         C – Complementary activities related to the implementation of the new definition
                of default.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                                                             73

                              In addition, the first two categories distinguish among a number of sub-categories.
                              While each of the categories covers different types of activities, they all seek the
                              same type of information for deliverables, responsibilities, and timeline (columns).
                              Figure 23: Action plan – Sheet “Action Plan” (excerpt)
                                                                                                                                            Unit responsible for Planned start Planned finish Duration (in
                                  ID                                                   Activity                       Expected deliverables                                                                Dependencies
                                                                                                                                                the activity         date          date          days)
                                  010                                                    020                                  030                   040              050            060           070          080
                                   A   Changes to the definition of default (acc. to EBA macro areas)
                                  A.1  Materiality thresholds and past due criterion in the identification of default
                                 A.1.1  (please list all sub-activities. If necessary, add additional rows)
                                 A.1.2 …
                                 A.1.3 …
                                 A.1.4 …
                                 A.1.5 …
                                  A.2  Indications of unlikeliness to pay
                                 A.2.1  (please list all sub-activities. If necessary, add additional rows)
                                 A.2.2 …
                                 A.2.3 …
                                 A.2.4 …
                                 A.2.5 …
Information to be provided in Within Category “A – Changes to the definition of default”, institutions are expected
Category A
                              to identify the activities necessary to ensure the completeness of the implementation
                              of (a) definition(s) of default compliant with the requirements and applicable optional
                              practices of the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with
                              the Delegated Regulation. In particular, they are asked to compile a list of all
                              activities relating to the following issues:
                              •        A.1 – Materiality thresholds and past due criterion in the identification of default;
                              •        A.2 – Indications of unlikeliness to pay;
                              •        A.3 – Application of the definition of default in external data;
                              •        A.4 – Criteria for the return to a non-defaulted status;
                              •        A.5 – Consistency in the application of the definition of default;
                              •        A.6 – Application of the definition of default for retail exposures;
                              •        A.7 – Documentation, internal policies and risk management processes.
                              If certain activities overlap between any of these categories, they should be
                              listed/replicated in each relevant sub-category.
Information to be provided in For Category “B – Changes in the calibration of the regulatory risk parameters used
Category B
                              for non-defaulted and defaulted exposures”, where applicable, institutions are
                              expected to present all activities required to ensure the recalibration of the risk
                              parameters by rating system. Even though, as part of the application itself,
                              institutions do not need to adjust their rating systems, where the new definition of
                              default significantly impacts the models, institutions will be expected to recalibrate
                              and/or modify their models to improve their risk measurement by 31 December 2020.
                              All such rating systems should be identified in the action plan. In each case,
                              institutions should (also) provide an estimate of the period required for recalibration
                              and the submission of an application for any material changes to the competent
                              authority.
                              Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                                                                                                                        74

                                  When recording the rating systems within this category, institutions should
                                  distinguish between rating systems applied to retail exposures and those applied to
                                  non-retail exposures. Moreover, institutions will need to clearly designate which
                                  rating systems are covered in which specific sub-category.
Information to be provided in     For Category “C – Complementary activities related to the implementation of the new
Category C
                                  definition of default”, institutions are expected to identify the planned validation and
                                  audit tasks, 38 planned staff training and any relevant activities not included in
                                  Categories A and B. As part of the latter, institutions should provide a list of all tasks
                                  related to adjustments of processes fulfilling the “use test” requirement (in
                                  accordance with Article 144(1)(b) of the CRR), e.g. a review of lending policies.
                                  For each of the above-mentioned categories of activities, institutions should provide
                                  the following information:
                                  •      activity;
                                  •      expected deliverables;
                                  •      unit responsible for the activity;
                                  •      planned start date;
                                  •      planned finish date;
                                  •      dependencies.
                                  Alongside this information, the action plan comprises two columns that are
                                  automatically filled in by the template based on the inputs provided (“ID” and
                                  “Duration in days”). They are highlighted in grey and must not be overridden.
Input 1: ID                       The column with identifier 010 is prefilled with a generic task ID. The identifier is
                                  generated in a particular row as soon as an entry is made in the column to the right-
                                  hand side (column identifier 020). This ID is relevant for linking activities that are
                                  performed in a sequential manner and must therefore not be changed.
Input 2: Activity                 In the column with identifier 020 (free-text field), institutions are expected to list all
                                  activities needed to ensure the complete execution of the implementation of the new
                                  definition of default.
                                  If necessary, additional rows can be added to each (sub)section of the action plan.
Input 3: Expected deliverables    In the column with identifier 030 (free-text field), institutions should identify the
                                  expected output(s) of each activity. Examples of expected outputs include the update
                                  of an internal policy, the setup of new procedures or the update of an IT system.
Input 4: Unit responsible for the In the column with identifier 040 (free-text field), institutions are asked to identify the
activity
                                  unit(s) responsible for ensuring the completeness of the activity. If necessary, this
                                  38
                                      In particular, the action plan is expected to include an internal audit of the new definition of default after
                                      its implementation, assessing the correct implementation and use of this new definition as soon as the
                                      supervisory approval is granted.
                                  Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                                                  75

                             may be a reference to a single entity within the submitting party considered
                             responsible for a specific activity.
Input 5: Planned start date  Within the column with identifier 050, institutions are asked to identify the expected
                             start date of the activity. Institutions should be aware of dependencies between
                             activities and how the start date of an activity may be dependent on the completion
                             of another (related) activity. The input must be a valid date format.
Input 6: Planned finish date Analogously to the column with identifier 050, in the column with identifier 060,
                             institutions are asked to provide the expected end date of the activity. The input must
                             be a valid date format.
Input 7: Duration (in days)  Based on the planned start and end date, the template automatically computes the
                             planned duration of the activity (in days) and records the result in the column with
                             identifier 070. The entry in this field must not be modified.
Input 8: Dependencies        In order to illustrate dependencies among different activities, in the column identifier
                             080, institutions may insert the ID of one or more activities. Institutions are expected
                             to identify the dependency of an activity whenever that specific activity can only be
                             accomplished after the completion of another activity. 39 The activity ID(s) must
                             correspond to one of the IDs provided in the column with identifier 010.
                             Figure 24: Action plan – Sheet “Action Plan” (annual calendar)
                                                                                              Year 2018
                                Before start of
                                                 Apr 2018   May 2018    Jun 2018     Jul 2018 Aug 2018   Sep 2018  Oct 2018   Nov 2018    Dec 2018
                               self-assessment
Input 9: Annual Calendar     Besides the columns described above, the action plan allows for the visualisation of
                             institutions’ planned activities in a sequential manner. An annual calendar permits an
                             allocation of the activities on a monthly scale starting from the month this guidance
                             was provided to institutions until the end of 2020; the latter corresponds to the
                             timeline proposed in the EBA Opinion for the effective implementation of the changes
                             stemming from the review of the IRB approach. To demarcate relevant activities
                             already completed before the initiation of the self-assessment, the template also
                             includes a column related to the recent past (labelled “Before start of self-
                             assessment”).
                             39
                                    Example: an institution will need to perform two activities, A and B, but Activity B can only be performed
                                    after the completion of Activity A because the outputs of Activity A constitute mandatory inputs for
                                    Activity B. In this situation, the institution is expected to provide a reference to Activity A in the column
                                    with identifier 080 for Activity B.
                             Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                                                       76

      To complete this component of the action plan template, institutions are expected to
      enter the duration of each activity by selecting the relevant months. To select a given
      month in the calendar, institutions need to enter the letter “y” in the relevant field.
8.2.3 Sheet “Guidance”
      The sheet "Guidance" comprises explanations on how to complete the template. The
      information presented in it is a summary of the guidance presented in this document.
      Implementation of the new definition of default - Action plan                           77

                     9         IT infrastructure
                               The changes in the definition of default not only imply changes in the methods for
                               developing and validating internal credit risk models, but may also impact institutions’
                               IT infrastructure. New cash flow types may have to be incorporated into the amount
                               past due (e.g. fees), new thresholds may become relevant, and new events may
                               trigger a default. Hence, the IT infrastructure is likely to be transformed, which entails
                               operational risks. Within their application package, institutions are therefore expected
                               to provide proof that operational risks arising from IT implementations have been
                               assessed and adequate tests or procedures to mitigate those operational risks to an
                               acceptable level have been introduced.
                     9.1       General guidance
                               Institutions are expected to submit the changes to their IT systems stemming from
                               the new definition of default on an aggregated level in the gap templates and the
                               action plan template. These changes may result in one or more of the following:
                               •     new parameters for existing and already tested functions/procedures and data
                                     models/entities;
                               •     new functions/procedures for existing and tested data models/entities;
                               •     new data models/entities.
                               On completing the implementation of the changes to their IT infrastructure,
                               institutions are expected to perform tests that demonstrate unambiguously that
                               the relevant changes to the IT infrastructure have been implemented properly
                               and do not have any unintended side effects. Since the implementation of all
                               necessary changes will not yet have been effective at the time of the submission
                               of the application package, the documentation of the review of the IT
                               infrastructure is expected to include tests that were initially conceived and
                               carried out in a laboratory environment (before the go-live).
Types of tests to be performed All tests can usually be assigned to one of the following categories, listed in
(if applicable)
                               ascending order of complexity:
                               (1) unit/component/module tests;
                               (2) integration tests (between whole units and/or systems);
                               (3) system tests (including functionality, performance, security, and portability tests);
                               (4) user acceptance tests (functional tests);
                               (5) regression tests.
                               Implementation of the new definition of default - IT infrastructure                    78

    In order to carry out a given type of test, the test process typically prescribes the
    definition of test cases and/or test scenarios. A test case is a set of conditions under
    which the tester determines whether an application is working as it was specified. A
    test scenario simulates the operational use of the tested application, including
    interactions with other applications and humans. The preparation of the test scenario
    is particularly important.
    For each test, the tester should specify an expectation for the test case’s outcome.
    The expectation should be consistent with the specified requirements on the
    application. Owing to the usually large number of data combinations and possible
    paths in an application, a large number of distinct test cases and test scenarios may
    be necessary in order to properly test an application. Deviations from the expected
    outcome are considered defects that need to be resolved before a final sign-off of
    the application is admissible.
    When applying for the changes in the definition of default, institutions are expected
    to have in place a thorough test concept/testing framework and to provide a report
    on the status quo of its testing activities up to that point. Nevertheless, it cannot be
    expected that all unit/component/module tests will have already been completed
    before the submission of the application package. Even so, institutions are expected
    to have designed adequate tests and procedures to mitigate all relevant (operational)
    risks to an acceptable level; this includes those units/components/modules for which
    the tests have not yet been completed at the date of submission of the application
    package. On completion of all tests/test cycles, but before the go-live of the new
    definition(s) of default, institutions should submit a final report on their testing
    activities. However, institutions are not expected to provide an updated overview of
    all tests performed after each test cycle.
    Outstanding test activities should be highlighted in the application package. As
    indicated in Chapter 3, the internal audit function of the respective institution is asked
    to attest to the completeness of all documents on test activities. Irrespective of their
    test concept and progress, institutions are expected to have resolved all defects
    before the final go-live of the new definition(s) of default. In other words, the closure
    of all defects is a precondition for receiving supervisory approval to implement the
    new definition of default.
9.2 IT test checklist
    This section describes a range of general and well-known issues relating to the
    definition of default and its implementation. The list is not intended to be exhaustive
    and needs to be adjusted to the situation of each individual institution. Nevertheless,
    it is strongly recommended that institutions consider and, where relevant, address
    the stated issues. Should additional aspects covering the specificities of an
    institution’s implementation be relevant, these should also be included in the
    Implementation of the new definition of default - IT infrastructure                      79

                                   development, implementation, and testing process. Likewise, if certain issues do not
                                   apply to an institution, they may be disregarded.
Methodological aspects             1.   Calculation of the materiality threshold: Are the absolute and relative
                                        components of the materiality threshold implemented correctly? For customers
                                        with many different financial products, for instance, the materiality threshold
                                        may need to incorporate the products’ specificities. Moreover, implementation in
                                        the case of syndicated loans and credit lines that are shared by more than one
                                        customer must be consistent with regard to the effect of fees, deferral amounts,
                                        and interest amounts on the threshold.
                                   2.   Calculation of the amount past due: Is the amount past due consistent with
                                        the level of the materiality threshold at all times? This includes tests on different
                                        customers, products, contracts and transactions.
                                   3.   Calculation of days past due: Are days past due derived from a comparison
                                        of the materiality threshold with the amount due on an absolute and a relative
                                        basis? A day is labelled as a due day if both the absolute and the relative
                                        thresholds are exceeded. The longest and most current sequence of due days
                                        defines the days past due. One special focus of the testing activities should be
                                        on the effect of weekends and public holidays when counting days past due.
                                   4.   Identification of defaults: Are exposures whose days past due exceed 90
                                        days classified as defaulted in a timely manner? Testing activities should also
                                        include other default triggers, such as forbearance measures.
                                   5.   Consistency in the identification of defaults: Does the scope considered for
                                        the assessment of the default of a single obligor encompass all exposures
                                        towards this obligor in all relevant legal entities? Testing activities should aim to
                                        establish whether there are adequate mechanisms and procedures to ensure a
                                        consistent application of the definition(s) of default both within a particular legal
                                        entity and within a group as a whole.
                                   6.   Treatment of defaulted exposures: Is the treatment of defaulted exposures
                                        for dependent events implemented correctly (e.g. contagion effect if the
                                        exposure is to a group of connected clients, synchronisation of defaults across
                                        group levels, and the return to non-default status)?
                                   7.   Unlikeliness to pay criteria: Are all relevant data fields (to store information
                                        necessary for the various unlikeliness to pay triggers) available and working as
                                        expected? Have existing data fields been equipped with new values where
                                        applicable? Are the new unlikeliness to pay triggers delivered across the entire
                                        interface chain from front desk over various interfaces to the central data
                                        warehouse?
Aspects relating to infrastructure 8.   Data model: Are adjustments to the data model required (e.g. due to new
                                        entities, new relationships, or new triggers)? If so, have the changes been
                                        tested and are they compatible with the previous data model?
                                   Implementation of the new definition of default - IT infrastructure                     80

                   9.   Workflows: Does the new definition of default require new automated
                        transactions or processes (e.g. batch runs)? If so, are there any dependencies
                        to/on other jobs which must be resolved?
                   10. User interfaces: Is there a need to extend existing graphical user interfaces
                        with respect to the information displayed and/or to record additional
                        information? If so, are the new interfaces compatible with the existing
                        processes?
                   11. Documentation: Is the documentation up to date and a versioning of changes
                        in place?
Functional aspects 12. Test concept: Is the number of test cases and the coverage of test cases
                        sufficient to verify the correctness of the implementation of the new definition of
                        default and its data storage?
                   13. Test process: Is the follow-up process for flaws and errors detected during
                        testing transparent and sufficiently efficient? Is the distribution of tasks and
                        responsibilities clearly defined?
                   Implementation of the new definition of default - IT infrastructure                   81

10 Monitoring
   In order to corroborate the soundness of the results of the retrospective simulation
   carried out by institutions for the purposes of their quantitative impact analyses, the
   actual impact of the change in institutions’ definition(s) of default will need to be
   monitored closely once the change will have been implemented. To this end,
   institutions are asked to set up a structured process for monitoring the risk figures
   and portfolio properties of their rating systems and to check whether they are still
   suitable for deriving their own funds requirements during the quarters following the
   implementation of the new definition of default. By way of this process, institutions
   should be able to collect a sufficient amount of information to complete a dedicated
   template (“monitoring template”).
   With a view to helping institutions to promptly set up the monitoring process, its
   structure (e.g. the submission cycle) and the inputs required in the monitoring
   template are outlined in Section 12.2 of the Annex. Nevertheless, it is worth
   highlighting that institutions will be required to fill in the monitoring template for their
   rating systems at a later stage, namely following the issuance of the related
   supervisory decisions. Therefore, this template should not be submitted as part of
   the application package for a material model change due to a change in the
   definition of default as described in Section 1.1.
   Institutions will be asked to provide both current and historical data. Each institution
   should thus set up its monitoring process such that it will be able to provide
   information based on both the new definition of default and the old one until it has
   been changed. Moreover, institutions will be asked to collect and provide information
   at two levels of granularity:
   1.    capital adequacy information akin to that required for Common Regulatory
         Reporting (CoRep) 40 but at the level of each rating system covered by the
         application for material model change;
   2.    information on portfolio properties similar to the figures derived for the
         quantitative impact analysis.
   The monitoring template will need to be submitted to the respective JST on a
   quarterly basis, from the quarter following the notification date of an institution’s
   supervisory decision. Rating systems for which institutions have not yet implemented
   the definition of default do not have to be included in the monitoring process.
   Depending on the outcome of the ECB decision, further rating systems might be
   exempted.
   40
       Implementing technical standards with regard to supervisory reporting of institutions, Commission
       Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1443 of 29 June 2018 amending Implementing Regulation (EU)
       No 680/2014 laying down implementing technical standards with regard to supervisory reporting of
       institutions according to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
       (OJ L 191, 28.6.2014, p. 1).
   Implementation of the new definition of default - Monitoring                                          82

The ECB will use the monitoring data to assess the performance of an institution’s
rating systems upon the go-live of the new definition of default and will liaise with
institutions in the event of unwarranted developments. As the monitoring process
may lead to supervisory action/measures, institutions should ensure high data quality
in their monitoring results. In particular, institutions should rectify any errors as soon
as they become apparent and should retrospectively update the monitoring results
as soon as possible (i.e. as part of the next submission of the template).
Implementation of the new definition of default - Monitoring                             83

11   FAQ process
11.1 General guidance
     This chapter describes the process for frequently asked questions (“FAQ process”)
     that has been set up in order to support institutions in carrying out the self-
     assessment. This process categorises and answers questions about the templates,
     the application package or the process guidance.
     In order to allow institutions to submit questions about the templates, a dedicated
     email address – dod@ecb.europa.eu – has been set up, which institutions are asked
     to use to submit questions. The ECB will provide answers to all questions submitted
     between 16 July 2018 and 14 December 2018. These answers will be made
     available every two weeks.
     The FAQ service provided by the ECB is not intended to answer questions unrelated
     to the application process set out here. For questions on the Guidelines or the draft
     RTS, institutions should refer to the EBA’s question and answer (Q&A) process. The
     ECB reserves the right to decide whether a question is within the scope of the FAQ
     service on a case-by-case basis.
     All questions provided by institutions are to be sent via a dedicated question
     template (“FAQ template”), which is part of the template package attached to this
     document. The template is a standard Excel file to be submitted using the following
     naming convention: “FAQ_question_template_[LEICode].xlsx”, where [LEICode]
     denotes the LEI code of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
     within the submitting party. The structure and name of the file must not be changed;
     otherwise questions cannot be considered. Questions submitted without the use of
     the template (e.g. within a flat text email) are not taken into account during the FAQ
     process.
     All answers by the ECB will be provided via a dedicated answer template that
     contains a complete list of all questions asked hitherto to the contact point(s) of each
     institution. This includes answers to questions submitted by other institutions.
     Institutions are therefore asked to submit their questions in a sufficiently general
     format that they can be disclosed to other institutions. In case of highly institution-
     specific questions, it is possible to prevent disclosure to other institutions; the ECB
     will assess the sensitivity of questions on a case-by-case basis.
     The ECB reserves the right to rephrase questions in a way that allows for disclosure
     to other institutions or to group different questions of different institutions into a single
     question. Where it is deemed appropriate not to disclose a certain question and
     answer to other institutions, the institution will, in addition to the answer template
     published and made available to all institutions, receive a separate answer template
     containing the undisclosed answer only.
     Implementation of the new definition of default - FAQ process                             84

                                 Institutions are expected to submit questions that are clear, correct, and precise.
                                 Moreover, before submitting a question, institutions should review the answer
                                 templates provided as part of the process to see whether a similar question has
                                 already been answered. The ECB reserves the right to neglect overly vague
                                 questions as well as duplicates.
                      11.2       Guidance on the template
General remarks                  The ECB aims to offer standardised support for all questions related to the self-
                                 assessment templates provided to institutions. Therefore, all questions must be
                                 submitted using the FAQ template and sent to dod@ecb.europa.eu.
                                 In order to provide the most appropriate support, it is vital to refer precisely to the
                                 paragraph or requirement/optional practice in question. To this end, the FAQ
                                 template provides dropdown menus for referring to the document, chapter, and/or
                                 worksheet underlying the institution’s structured self-assessment. Institutions are
                                 strongly encouraged to make use of this possibility.
                                 The ECB reserves the right to exclude FAQ templates that have been changed in
                                 structure or functionality during processing. As indicated above, the ECB may in
                                 addition combine one or more questions received by one or more institutions. This
                                 includes rephrasing the questions, if deemed appropriate.
                                 The FAQ template contains seven columns:
                                 •            Institution Question ID;
                                 •            Document;
                                 •            Chapter;
                                 •            Row ID;
                                 •            Question Date;
                                 •            Question;
                                 •            Additional Comments.
                                 Figure 25: FAQ template
                                  Institution Question ID Document Chapter     Row ID Question Date Question   Additional Comment
                                             001
                                             002
                                             003
                                             004
                                             005
                                             006
                                             007
                                             008
                                             009
                                             010
Input 1: Institution Question ID The first column serves as an identifier for all questions. It must not be changed.
                                 Implementation of the new definition of default - FAQ process                                    85

Input 2: Document           Column “Document” seeks a reference to the document in question; the options are
                            provided in a dropdown menu. Institutions may choose “Guidance”, if the question
                            refers to this process guidance document, a particular template (e.g. “Gap Analysis
                            Template”) if the question refers to one of the templates delivered alongside this
                            document, or “Other”, if the question concerns general issues (e.g. about the
                            submission process).
Input 3: Chapter            Column “Chapter” allows the entry of reference to a chapter of the process guidance
                            document or the sheet identifier of the chosen template. If “Other” was selected as
                            the document in question, only “Other” may be chosen here.
Input 4: Row ID             Where questions arise about one of the templates, institutions are also asked to
                            provide a reference to the row identification that is provided within the respective
                            sheet.
Input 5: Question Date      Institutions are encouraged to provide a question date for their own reference.
                            However, this field is not mandatory.
Input 6: Question           Institutions should use Column “Question” to provide their questions, comprising all
                            information important to the query.
Input 7: Additional Comment If deemed necessary, institutions may also provide additional comments, comprising
                            non-essential details or clarifications.
                            A question is regarded as complete and ready for submission when the “Document”,
                            “Chapter”, and “Question” fields have been filled. The “Institution Question ID” of a
                            submitted question is then saved by the ECB. As a consequence, institutions
                            wanting to adjust a previously submitted question should submit a new question (in a
                            new row/with a new ID).
                            Any email sent to the central email address (dod@ecb.europa.eu) is regarded as a
                            submission. If an institution does not find one of its questions answered during the
                            FAQ process, it should – as a first step – verify that it has been submitted
                            appropriately. It may also check whether the question has been slightly rephrased. If
                            neither is the case, the institution may send an email indicating this fact to the central
                            email address.
                            Implementation of the new definition of default - FAQ process                          86

                12     Annex
                12.1   Clarifications
                       The requirements and optional practices considered in the gap template are drawn
                       directly from the Guidelines and ECB Regulation (EU) YYYY/XYZ in conjunction with
                       the Delegated Regulation. In order to provide assistance on some terms used within
                       these regulatory products as well as the requirements/optional practices considered
                       in the template, this section endeavours to offer clarification by supplying
                       reference(s) to supporting documentation provided by the EBA or other regulations.
                       However, it is neither the purpose nor the objective of this section to define legal
                       terms deliberately left undefined by the EBA. Any further inquiries on concepts and
                       terms deemed unclear by institutions should be addressed to the EBA through its
                       question and answer (Q&A) process in order to receive a detailed explanation.
                       In keeping with the gap template, the clarifications presented below are separated
                       into clarifications on “requirements” and clarifications on “optional practices”.
                12.1.1 Clarifications on requirements
Clarification 1
                        No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                         T2-1, T5-1                                         16
                        For the purposes of assessing the materiality of past-due credit obligations, the
                        institution takes into account any amount of principal, interest or fee that has not
                        been paid at the date it was due.
                        In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of the Delegated Regulation, the absolute
                        component of the threshold is set as a limit to the sum of all past-due amounts,
                        whereas the relative component is set as a percentage of the sum of all past-due
                        amounts (as in the absolute component) versus the total amount of all on-balance-
                        sheet exposures excluding equity exposures. The sum of all past-due amounts, in
                        both components of the threshold, should include any amount of principal, interest,
                        or fee that has not been paid at the date on which it was due.
                        As for the choice of denominator in the relative component of the threshold, in the
                        “Background and rationale” chapter of the draft RTS the EBA clarifies as follows:
                        “The use of on-balance-sheet exposures as the denominator of the relative
                        threshold provides a simple and comparable solution. As only the outstanding
                        exposures, unlike unused credit lines, can in fact become past-due, it ensures
                        consistency between the numerator and denominator of the ratio. Furthermore, it
                        prevents the impact of the relative threshold being diminished by the inclusion in
                       Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                               87

                 the denominator of off-balance-sheet exposures that cannot in practice be drawn
                 by an obligor and do not have credit characteristics.”
Clarification 2
                 No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                   T2-9, T5-9                                       23b
                 A technical past-due situation is considered to have occurred where an institution
                 identifies that the defaulted status was a result of the non-execution, defective or
                 late execution of the payment transaction ordered by the obligor or where there is
                 evidence that the payment was unsuccessful due to the failure of the payment
                 system.
                 Delays in payments can be triggered either by errors in the data or IT systems of
                 the bank or of the counterparty, or by failures of the payment system between the
                 bank and the counterparty. In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation
                 Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the EBA clarifies the approach for each case:
                 “Delays in payments resulting from errors in the data or IT systems of the
                 counterparty should not be considered technical past-due situations, as it is the
                 obligation of the debtor to provide the payment to the institution in a timely manner.
                 It would be difficult for an institution to verify whether an error has actually occurred
                 at the counterparty and such a possibility, if granted, could be misused. The
                 obligors should not be encouraged to pay their obligations only on the last day
                 before the recognition of default; rather, they should provide the payments in
                 accordance with contractual obligations. However, it has been clarified that the
                 failure of the payment system between the bank and the counterparty could be
                 considered a source of technical defaults alongside errors on the part of banks;
                 however, in that situation the obligor has to provide evidence that it attempted to
                 make a payment but that it was unsuccessful due to the failure of the payment
                 system.”
Clarification 3
                 No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                 T2-13, T5-13                                        24
                 In the event that the institution uses the IRB approach, technical past-due situations
                 are removed from the reference data set of defaulted exposures for the purpose of
                 estimation of risk parameters.
                 In its responses during the consultation phase on the Guidelines, the EBA clarified
                 that the technical past-due situation should not be considered as a default and
                 therefore the criteria for a return to non-defaulted status do not apply. Any identified
                 errors should be corrected as soon as possible. Thus, in case of technical past-due
                 situations, the obligors should keep their non-defaulted status and be treated as if
                 they would have been non-defaulted during the timespan for which they were
                Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                  88

                 considered to be under a technical past due if no other triggers of default apply.
Clarification 4
                 No of the requirement in the template:                         Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                  T2-32, T5-32                                                     41
                 Sales of traditional securitisations where there is a significant risk transfer are also
                 considered sales of credit obligations.
                 The term “significant risk transfer” is governed by Articles 243 and 244 of the CRR
                 and the EBA Guidelines on significant risk transfer (EBA/GL/2014/05). 41
Clarification 5
                 No of the requirement in the template:                         Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                  T2-37, T5-37                                                     46
                 The sale of credit obligations may be performed either before or after the default. In
                 the event that the institution uses the IRB approach, regardless of the moment of
                 the sale, if the sale was related with a material credit-related economic loss, the
                 information about the loss must be adequately recorded and stored for the purpose
                 of the estimation of risk parameters.
                 In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, 42
                 the EBA clarifies this requirement:
                 “The sale of credit obligations as a default trigger is relevant for exposures that are
                 not yet defaulted at the moment of the sale. In the case [of] exposures defaulted
                 before their sale, such sale will not define the moment of default but will determine
                 the level of loss related to the previously defaulted exposure. In the case of
                 institutions that use the advanced IRB approach this information should be
                 adequately recorded and stored for the purpose of [the] LGD estimation process.”
Clarification 6
                 No of the requirement in the template:                         Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                  T2-42, T5-42                                                     49
                 For the purposes of unlikeliness to pay as referred to in Article 178(3)(d) of the
                 CRR, a distressed restructuring is considered to have occurred when forbearance
                 measures, i.e. concessions, have been extended to a debtor facing or about to face
                 difficulties in meeting its financial commitments as specified in paragraphs 163-167
                 and 172-174 of Annex V of the ITS on supervisory reporting.
                41
                    EBA Guidelines on significant credit risk transfer relating to Articles 243 and Article 244 of Regulation
                    575/2013.
                42
                    EBA Consultation Paper on Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178 of
                    Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
                Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                                      89

                 In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the
                 EBA states:
                 “The definition of distressed restructuring has been aligned with the definition of
                 forbearance used for the purpose of supervisory reporting. As forbearance refers
                 only to such changes of terms and conditions resulting from financial difficulties of
                 the obligor, only such situations should be treated as potential indications of
                 unlikeliness to pay in accordance with Article 178(3)(d) of the CRR”.
                 Therefore, the identification of distressed restructuring should follow the same rules
                 as those implemented by institutions to identify forbearance as defined in Annex V
                 of the ITS on supervisory reporting. 43
Clarification 7
                 No of the requirement in the template:                        Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                    T2-44, T5-44                                               51-52
                 The institution has set a threshold for the diminished financial obligation that is
                 considered to be caused by material forgiveness or postponement of principal,
                 interest, or fees, and which is calculated according to the following formula, and is
                 not higher than 1%:
                 DO= (NPV0 – NPV1)/NPV0
                 where:
                 DO is diminished financial obligation;
                 NPV0 is net present value of cash flows (including unpaid interest and fees)
                 expected under contractual obligations before the changes in terms and conditions
                 of the contract discounted using the customer’s original effective interest rate;
                 NPV1 is net present value of the cash flows expected based on the new
                 arrangement discounted using the customer’s original effective interest rate.
                 Where the diminished financial obligation is higher than this threshold, the
                 exposures should be considered defaulted.
                 With the term “original effective interest rate” the EBA aims to align with
                 International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) common practices. However, in
                 its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the
                 EBA clarifies as follows:
                 “It has been specified that NPV should be calculated with the use of the original
                 effective interest rate as a discounting factor in order to align the rule with
                43
                     Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/227 of 9 January 2015 amending Implementing
                     Regulation (EU) No 680/2014 laying down implementing technical standards with regard to supervisory
                     reporting of institutions according to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of
                     the Council (OJ L 48, 20.2.2015, p. 1)
                Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                                 90

                 accounting practices. Therefore, any approximation of such rate or treatment of
                 variable rates that is used for accounting purposes should also be used in the
                 calculation of NPV for the purpose of default identification.”
                 Institutions applying accounting standards other than IFRS (i.e. national Generally
                 Accepted Accounting Principles, GAAPs) are supposed to align this rate with the
                 definitions applied within their respective accounting frameworks.
Clarification 8
                 No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                 T2-47, T5-47                                        54
                 Any concession extended to an obligor already in default leads to the classification
                 of the obligor as a distressed restructuring. All exposures classified as forborne
                 non-performing in accordance with Annex V of the ITS on supervisory reporting are
                 classified as default and subject to distressed restructuring.
                 The term “concession” is to be interpreted in line with paragraphs 163-165 and 172-
                 174 of Annex V of the ITS on supervisory reporting.
Clarification 9
                 No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                 T2-64, T5-64                                        70
                 For differences between the definition of default used in the external data and the
                 definition of default as implemented which prove to be non-negligible in terms of the
                 impact on all risk parameters and own funds requirements, and which at the same
                 time prove impossible to overcome by means of adjustments to the external data,
                 the institution adopts an appropriate margin of conservatism in the estimation of
                 risk parameters. In such a case, institutions should ensure that this additional
                 margin of conservatism reflects the materiality of the remaining differences in the
                 definition of default and their possible impact on all risk parameters.
                 In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the
                 EBA states:
                 “The Guidelines set minimum standards and a common understanding of the main
                 concepts related to the definition of default. […] The clarification of terms such as
                 ‘material’, ‘significant’ or ‘large’ has been proposed wherever it was considered that
                 harmonisation is appropriate. Otherwise it is left to the expert judgement of
                 institutions.”
                 Against this background, it is left to the expert judgement of the institution to assess
                 when the impact of a difference on all risk parameters and own funds requirements
                 is to be considered “non-negligible”. Nevertheless, the self-assessment of the
                 impact is part of the analyses to be documented according to paragraph 67(c) of
                 the Guidelines.
                Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                91

Clarification 10
                  No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                           T2-89, T2-90, T5-89, T5-90                                81-82
                  Where the exchange of client data among different legal entities within the
                  institution, the parent undertaking or any of its subsidiaries is prohibited by
                  consumer protection regulations, bank secrecy or other legislation resulting in
                  inconsistencies in the identification of default of an obligor, the institution informs
                  the competent authorities of these legal impediments and, if using the IRB
                  approach, also estimates the materiality of the inconsistencies in the identification
                  of default of an obligor and their possible impact on the estimates of risk
                  parameters.
                  Further, where the identification of default of an obligor in a manner fully consistent
                  across the institution, the parent undertaking or any of its subsidiaries is very
                  burdensome, requiring development of a centralised database of all clients or
                  implementation of other mechanisms or procedures to verify the status of each
                  client at all entities within the group, the institution does not need to apply such
                  mechanisms or procedures if it demonstrates that the effect of non-compliance is
                  immaterial because there are no or a very limited number of common clients
                  among the relevant entities within a group and the exposure to these clients is
                  immaterial.
                  In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the
                  EBA states:
                  “The application of the default of an obligor on a group-wide basis is required by
                  Article 178(1) of the CRR. The CRR also specifies the relevant level of
                  consolidation.”
                  In order to address operational aspects of the application of the definition of default
                  at a group-wide level, paragraphs 81 and 82 specify situations where simplified
                  processes may be applied.”
Clarification 11
                  No of the requirement in the template:                 Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                       T2-106                                         97
                  Where the conditions of points (a) or (b) or both of Article 178(1) of the CRR are
                  met for a joint credit obligation of two or more obligors, the institution considers all
                  other joint credit obligations of the same set of obligors and all individual exposures
                  to those obligors as defaulted, unless the recognition of default on the individual
                  exposures, too, is not appropriate because (a) the delay in payment of a joint credit
                  obligation results from a dispute between the individual obligors participating in the
                  joint credit obligation that has been introduced to a court or another formal
                  procedure performed by a dedicated external body that results in a binding ruling in
                  accordance with the applicable legal framework in the relevant jurisdiction, and
                  there is no concern about the financial situation of the individual obligors; or (b) the
                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                   92

                         joint credit obligation is an immaterial part of the total obligations of an individual
                         obligor.
                         In its responses to the questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15, the
                         EBA states:
                         “The Guidelines set minimum standards and a common understanding of the main
                         concepts related to the definition of default. […] The clarification of terms such as
                         ‘material’, ‘significant’ or ‘large’ has been proposed wherever it was considered that
                         harmonisation is appropriate. Otherwise it is left to the expert judgement of
                         institutions.”
                         Against this background, it is left to the expert judgement of the institution how to
                         assess whether the joint credit obligation is an immaterial part of the total
                         obligations of an individual obligor.
                 12.1.2 Clarifications on optional practices
Clarification 12
                                No of the opt. practice in the                  Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                   template: T3-14, T6-14                                    59f
                         For the exposures to an individual, the institution may consider as an indicator of
                         unlikeliness to pay on the basis of internal information a situation of default of a
                         company fully owned by a single individual, where this individual provided the
                         institution with a personal guarantee for all obligations of a company.
                         The term “an individual” in the guidelines only refers to a natural person and not to
                         a legal person (e.g. a holding company). In the guidelines, the expression “an
                         individual” is used various times in relation to a natural person:
                         Paragraph 96: “This notion does not extend to a credit obligation of an individual
                         obligor secured by another individual or entity in the form of a guarantee or other
                         credit protection.”
                         The reference “by another individual or entity” illustrates that in this case “an
                         individual” refers to a natural person.
                         Paragraph 100: “[…], but excluding credit obligations of an individual obligor
                         secured by another individual or entity in the form of a guarantee or other credit
                         protection.”
                         The reference “by another individual or entity” illustrates that, in this case, “an
                         individual” refers to a natural person.
                         Paragraph 101: “Where an individual is fully liable for the obligations of a company,
                         default of that company should result in that individual being considered defaulted
                        Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                  93

                  as well.”
                  The first sub-sentence illustrates that in this case “an individual” refers to a natural
                  person.
                  Paragraph 102: “Additionally, in the specific case of an individual entrepreneur
                  where an individual is fully liable for both private and commercial obligations with
                  both private and commercial assets the default of any of the private or commercial
                  obligations should cause all private and commercial obligations of such individual to
                  be considered as defaulted as well.”
                  The reference “where an individual is fully liable for both private and commercial
                  obligations” illustrates that in this case “an individual” refers to a natural person.
Clarification 13
                         No of the opt. practice in the                  Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                template: T3-24                                       88
                  The institution may apply the definition of default at the level of an obligor for some
                  types of retail exposures and at the level of a credit facility for others, where this is
                  well justified by internal risk management practices, for instance due to a different
                  business model of a subsidiary, and where there is evidence that the number of
                  situations where the same clients are subject to different definitions of default at
                  different levels of application is kept to a strict minimum.
                  An institution applying this optional practice should always provide solid justification
                  for it on the basis of its internal risk management practices. In assessing the
                  number of situations where the same clients are subject to different definitions of
                  default at different levels of application, the institution should consider that “the
                  wording ‘strict minimum’ suggests that the extent of acceptable overlap should be
                  limited to very few individual cases” as specified by the EBA in its responses to the
                  questions on EBA Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2015/15.
Clarification 14
                         No of the opt. practice in the                  Paragraph in the Guidelines:
                                template: T3-27                                       94
                  Additionally, where a significant part of the exposures to the obligor is in default, the
                  institution may consider it unlikely that the other obligations of that obligor will be
                  paid in full without recourse to actions such as realising collateral and treat them as
                  defaulted as well.
                  An institution adhering to this optional practice defines an indication of unlikeness
                  to pay that specifies when the part of the exposures in default of that obligor is
                  significant and, as a consequence, other obligations of that obligor should be
                  treated as defaulted. This is relevant for retail exposures, where the definition of
                  default is applied at credit facility level.
                 Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                   94

      In the context of the identification of non-performing exposures according to
      paragraph 155 of Annex V of the ITS on supervisory reporting, an approach
      consistent with this optional practice is applied “[w]here an institution has on-
      balance-sheet exposures to a debtor that are past due by more than 90 days and
      the gross carrying amount of the past-due exposures represents more than 20% of
      the gross carrying amount of all on-balance-sheet exposures to that debtor, all on-
      and off-balance-sheet exposures to that debtor shall be considered as non-
      performing”. Moreover, as specified in the “Background and Rationale” chapter of
      the Guidelines (Section 2.7.2): “Institutions may either use the same threshold as
      for the purpose of supervisory reporting (currently 20%) or specify a different level
      of threshold.” This threshold is based on the ratio between the gross carrying
      amount of the defaulted facilities and the gross carrying amount of all on-balance-
      sheet exposures towards the same obligor (paragraph 155 of Annex V of the ITS
      on supervisory reporting).
12.2 Further details on monitoring
     The objective of this annex is to provide detailed guidance on the level and depth of
     information to be tracked as part of the monitoring process and to offer guidance on
     completing the monitoring template. As indicated in Chapter 10, the monitoring
     template should be submitted at regular intervals. More precisely, it should be
     submitted to the respective JST for each full quarter (“monitoring period”) following
     the notification date of a supervisory decision on an institution and its implementation
     in the calculation of own funds requirements in the rating systems (cf. Table 3).
     Table 3: Monitoring periods and their submission dates
       Period No                    Monitoring period                 Data to be submitted
      1                        1 April 2019 – 30 June 2019             30 September 2019
      2                    1 July 2019 – 30 September 2019             30 December 2019
      3                  1 October 2019 – 31 December 2019                31 March 2020
      4                     1 January 2020 – 31 March 2020                 30 June 2020
      5                        1 April 2020 – 30 June 2020             30 September 2020
      6                    1 July 2020 – 30 September 2020             30 December 2020
      7                  1 October 2020 – 31 December 2020                31 March 2021
     Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                95

                      12.2.1          General guidance
                                      As a general rule, the monitoring template should be completed by the supervised
                                      entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party. It is therefore
                                      expected to comprise the consolidated results for all relevant rating systems across
                                      the full organisational structure of the submitting party.
                                      In order to monitor the adequacy of institutions’ rating systems on a timely and
                                      targeted basis, institutions are asked to provide both current and historical data. The
                                      term “historical data” is meant to refer to (all) data before the current observation
                                      period. Hence, each submission should also contain the relevant data for previous
                                      reporting periods, rather than only the observation period as shown in Table 3. As
                                      part of the parameter-related monitoring process, for instance, institutions will be
                                      asked to provide three-month default rates and different vintage cure rates for all
                                      relevant rating systems derived using the new definition of default as well as
                                      comparative/reference data from the period before implementation of the new
                                      definition of default. The respective realised and historical default and cure rates will
                                      then be compared in order to gauge the appropriateness of a given rating system in
                                      the light of the new definition of default.
Definition of default to be used to   When determining the figures to be provided in the monitoring template, institutions
derive the entries for the monitoring
template                              are asked always to use the values as per the definition of default that is applied for
                                      the calculation of own funds requirements on the given date/in the given monitoring
                                      period. Therefore, institutions should use the old definition of default before
                                      implementation of the new definition of default, and subsequently the new definition
                                      of default. Should the respective figures of preceding months have to be adjusted
                                      owing to errors and/or corrections, the results should be updated within the next
                                      submission of the template.
                                      The monitoring template should be submitted using the following naming convention:
                                      “monitoring_template_[LEICode].xlsx”, where [LEICode] denotes the LEI code of the
                                      supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party.
                      12.2.2          Guidance on the template
                                      The monitoring template is an Excel workbook consisting of five sheets:
                                      •     General Information;
                                      •     Common Input;
                                      •     F-IRBA Specific Input;
                                      •     A-IRBA Specific Input;
                                      •     Guidance.
                                      While Sheet “General Information” asks for basic reference data on the supervised
                                      entity at the highest level of consolidation within the submitting party, Sheet
                                      Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                   96

         “Common Input” seeks a range of CoRep-like inputs at the level of each relevant
         rating system. Sheets “F-IRBA Specific Input” and “A-IRBA Specific Input”, in turn,
         are the input templates for the monitoring data for (i) rating systems for which
         institutions do not have permission to use own LGD estimates and (ii) rating systems
         for which they do have such permission, respectively. Sheet “Guidance” does not
         have input fields; it provides information on how to complete the other sheets within
         the template only. Detailed guidance on how to fill each input field is provided in the
         following subsections.
12.2.2.1 Sheet “General Information”
         In order to clearly identify the submitting party, Sheet “General Information” has five
         input fields requesting the name and LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level
         of consolidation within the submitting party, and the details of a contact person able
         to respond to queries about the template’s content.
         Figure 26: Monitoring template – Sheet "General Information"
          Name of the supervised entity at the highest level of
          consolidation within submitting party:
          LEI of the supervised entity at the highest level of consolidation
          within submitting party:
          Name of the contact person at the institution:
          Telephone of the contact person at the institution:
          E-mail of the contact person at the institution:
12.2.2.2 Sheet “Common Input”
         The “general” component of the monitoring process involves an assessment of the
         evolution of aggregated own funds-level figures by rating system. To this end,
         institutions are expected to provide the following information:
         •      RWEAs for non-defaulted exposures;
         •      RWEAs for exposures in default;
         •      EL amounts for non-defaulted exposures;
         •      ELBE amounts for defaulted exposures;
         •      exposure amounts not in default;
         •      exposure amounts in default.
         All input fields in this template require numerical and/or free-text entries.
         Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                               97

                                    Figure 27: Monitoring template – Sheet “Common Input” (excerpt)
                                                       Implementation of the                                                                   Risk weighted exposure amount for non-defaulted e
                                      Rating System ID
                                                          new DoD as at
                                                                             31/12/2016 31/03/2017 30/06/2017 30/09/2017 31/12/2017 31/03/2018 30/06/2018  30/09/2018  31/12/2018 31/03/2019   3
                                             010               020               030        031        032        033        034        035        036         037         038        039
Input 1: Rating System ID           The column with identifier 010 should contain the unique identifier for each rating
                                    system as assigned in the registry template.
Input 2: Implementation of the new  The column with identifier 020 should be filled with the date on which the new
DoD as at:
                                    definition of default within the given rating system was implemented, i.e. the day
                                    when the application of the new definition of default became effective.
Input 3: Risk weighted exposure     The columns with identifiers 030 through 046 should contain the RWEAs derived
amount for non-defaulted
exposures                           using the definition provided for Column 260 of CoRep Template C 08.01 (“Risk
                                    weighted exposure amount after SME-supporting factor”) for the given rating system,
                                    for exposures not in default on the given date.
Input 4: Risk weighted exposure     The columns with identifiers 050 through 066 should contain the RWEAs derived
amount for exposures in default
                                    using the definition provided for Column 260 of CoRep Template C 08.01 (“Risk
                                    weighted exposure amount after SME-supporting factor”) for the given rating system,
                                    for exposures in default on the given date.
Input 5: EL amount for non-         The columns with identifiers 070 through 086 should contain the EL amounts derived
defaulted exposures
                                    using the definition provided for Column 280 of CoRep Template C 08.01 (“Expected
                                    loss amount”) for the given rating system, for exposures not in default on the given
                                    date.
Input 6: ELBE amount for defaulted  The columns with identifiers 090 through 106 should contain the EL amounts derived
exposures
                                    using the definition provided for Column 280 of CoRep Template C 08.01 (“Expected
                                    loss amount”) for the given rating system, for exposures in default on the given date.
Input 7: Exposure amount not in     The columns with identifiers 110 through 126 should contain the exposure amounts
default
                                    derived using the definition provided for Column 110 of CoRep Template C 08.01
                                    (“Exposure value”) for the given rating system, for exposures not in default on the
                                    given date.
Input 8: Exposure amount in default The columns with identifiers 110 through 126 should contain the exposure amounts
                                    derived using the definition provided for Column 110 of CoRep Template C 08.01
                                    (“Exposure value”) for the given rating system, for exposures in default on the given
                                    date.
                                    Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                                                                               98

                    12.2.2.3       Sheets “F-IRBA Specific Input” and “A-IRBA Specific Input”
                                   Sheet “F-IRBA Specific Input” and Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input” have the same
                                   structure. However, as the two approaches have different scopes of application,
                                   Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input” contains some additional fields that are not part of
                                   Sheet “F-IRBA Specific Input”. The differences are clearly marked in the guidance
                                   set out below.
                                   Sheet “F-IRBA Specific Input” should only be completed for rating systems that do
                                   not provide own estimates of LGD and fall within the general scope of the monitoring
                                   process. Therefore, rating systems for retail exposures should not, under any
                                   circumstances, be considered within this sheet. On the other hand, Sheet “A-IRBA
                                   Specific Input” should be filled in for all rating systems that do provide own estimates
                                   of LGD. In each case, institutions are expected to provide the following information:
                                   •        the ID of the rating system;
                                   •        the implementation date of the new definition of default;
                                   •        the number of non-defaulted obligors;
                                   •        the number of new defaults in the given quarter;
                                   •        the number of new defaults due to a technical past-due situation in the given
                                            quarter;
                                   •        the vintage cure rate according to time in default based on the old definition of
                                            default from 1 January 2017 onwards (Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input” only);
                                   •        the vintage cure rate according to time in default based on the new definition of
                                            default (Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input” only).
                                   All input fields in this template require numerical and/or free-text entries.
                                   Figure 28: Monitoring template – Sheet "F-IRBA Specific Input" (excerpt)
                                                       Implementation of the                                                                              Number of non-defaulted obligors
                                      Rating System ID
                                                          new DoD as at
                                                                             31/12/2016 31/03/2017 30/06/2017 30/09/2017 31/12/2017 31/03/2018 30/06/2018 30/09/2018 31/12/2018  31/03/2019  30/0
                                             010               020               030        031        032        033        034        035        036        037        038         039         0
Input 1: Rating System ID          The column with identifier 010 should contain the unique identifier for each rating
                                   system as assigned in the registry template.
Input 2: Implementation of the new The column with identifier 020 should be filled with the date the new definition of
DoD as at
                                   default within the given rating system was implemented, i.e. the day when the
                                   application of the new definition of default became effective.
                                   Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                                                                                  99

Input 3: Number of non-defaulted       The columns with identifiers 030 through 046 should contain the number of
obligors
                                       obligors 44 within the range of application of the given rating system who are not
                                       defaulted on the given date.
                                       Institutions are asked to calculate this number according to the rules set out in
                                       Section 12.2.1, especially regarding the relevant definition of default to be used.
Input 4: Number of new defaults in     The columns with identifiers 050 through 065 seek the number of new obligor 45
the given quarter
                                       defaults within the range of application for the given rating system that occurred
                                       during the given time period. Institutions are asked to include all defaults in these
                                       fields, even those that may later be identified as related to a technical past-due
                                       situation (i.e. “Number of new defaults in quarter” is a superset of “Number of new
                                       defaults due to a technical past-due situation in a given quarter”).
                                       Institutions are asked to calculate this number according to the rules set out in
                                       Section 12.2.1, especially regarding the relevant definition of default to be used.
Input 5: Number of new defaults        The columns with identifiers 070 through 085 should contain the number of new
due to technical past-due situation
in the given quarter                   obligor 46 defaults within the range of application for the given rating system that
                                       occurred during the given time period, and which were identified as related to a
                                       technical past-due situation. Each value in these fields is a subset of the “Number of
                                       new defaults in quarter” of the corresponding quarter.
                                       Institutions are asked to calculate this number according to the rules set out in
                                       Section 12.2.1, especially regarding the relevant definition of default to be used.
Input 6: Vintage cure rate according   The inputs for the columns with identifiers 090 through 095 should be based on
to time in default – Old Definition of
Default from 2017 onwards              defaults that occurred (were triggered/started) between 01 January 2017 and the
                                       implementation of the new definition of default.
                                       Institutions are asked to categorise these defaults according to the time remaining in
                                       default before curing (“time to cure”) into time buckets (“vintage buckets”). The
                                       definition of a cure should follow institutions' own definition 47 in accordance with their
                                       LGD model and the definition of default in place. The classification should only
                                       depend on the time in default, i.e. the vintage, and should be irrespective of the
                                       specific occurrence date of the default. The time to cure is always calculated as the
                                       difference between the cure date and the date of the default.
                                       Institutions are expected to consider each cure for all vintage buckets with a horizon
                                       smaller than or equal to the time to cure. Defaults that do not cure should not be
                                       considered.
                                       44
                                           For rating systems where the PD model(s) and default recognition work on a facility basis, institutions
                                           may use the facility level instead of the obligor level for the purpose of this monitoring.
                                       45
                                           For rating systems where the PD model(s) and default recognition work on a facility basis, institutions
                                           may use the facility level instead of the obligor level for the purpose of this monitoring.
                                       46
                                           For rating systems where the PD model(s) and default recognition work on a facility basis, institutions
                                           may use the facility level instead of the obligor level for the purpose of this monitoring.
                                       47
                                           Where institutions do not have a definition of “cure rate”, they should use the number of facilities (or
                                           obligors) – out of those that defaulted within the observation period – that returned from defaulted to
                                           non-defaulted status divided by the total number of defaulted facilities (or obligors) within the period
                                           between 1 January 2017 and the implementation of the new definition of default.
                                       Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                                                    100

                                     Therefore, the difference between the date of the default and the monitoring date
                                     determines the highest vintage bucket possible. For example, if the monitoring date
                                     is 31 December 2019, a default that occurred on 23 December 2018 may only have
                                     a maximum vintage bucket of one year. In addition, all defaults that are considered in
                                     the one-year vintage bucket should also be considered in the three, six and nine-
                                     month vintage buckets. However, those shorter vintage buckets may also contain
                                     additional cures with a time to cure of less than one year.
                                     Institutions are asked to calculate this number according to the rules set out in
                                     Section 12.2.1, especially regarding the relevant definition of default to be used.
                                     This field is only part of Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input”.
Input 7: Vintage cure rate according The inputs of the columns with identifiers 100 through 105 should be based on
to time in default – New Definition
of Default                           defaults that occurred (were triggered/started) after the implementation of the new
                                     definition of default and its use for the calculation of own funds requirements.
                                     Apart from this difference, it is defined analogously to “Vintage cure rate according to
                                     time in default – Old Definition of Default from 2017 onwards”.
                                     Institutions are asked to calculate this number according to the rules set out in
                                     Section 12.2.1, especially regarding the relevant definition of default to be used.
                                     This field is only part of Sheet “A-IRBA Specific Input”.
                      12.2.3         Sheet “Guidance”
                                     Sheet "Guidance" comprises explanations on how to complete the template. The
                                     information presented in it is a summary of the guidance presented in this document.
                                     Implementation of the new definition of default - Annex                             101

Glossary/list of abbreviations
     Term/abbreviation                                                    Explanation
action plan template      template “action_plan_template_[LEICode].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
CCF                       credit conversion factor in accordance with Article 4(1)(56) of the CRR
CRM                       credit risk mitigation in accordance with Article 4(1)(57) of the CRR
CRR                       Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on
                          prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU)
                          No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1)
cure rate                 the ratio between the number of recovering exposures occurred during a period that starts from one
                          year before a date T and the number of defaulted obligors one year before that date; the one-year
                          horizon may be changed to a different period if explicitly stated otherwise
default rate              default rate in accordance with Article 4(1)(78) of the CRR; unless stated otherwise referring to a one-
                          year period
DoD                       definition of default
EAD                       exposure at default in the sense of exposure value in accordance with Articles 111 and 166 of the CRR
EBA                       European Banking Authority
ECB                       European Central Bank
EL                        expected loss in accordance with Articles 5(3) and 158 of the CRR (in EUR millions)
ELBE                      expected loss best estimate in accordance with Article 181(1)(h) of the CRR (in EUR millions)
EU                        European Union
FAQ process               the process for the submission of frequently asked questions by participating institutions during the
                          execution of the self-assessment by institutions and the distribution of answers by the ECB
FAQ template              template “FAQ_question_template_[LEICode].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
gap template              template “gap_template_[LEICode]_[NrTemplate].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
Guidelines                EBA Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178 of Regulation (EU) No
                          575/2013 (EBA/Guidelines/2016/07)
IRB/IRBA                  internal ratings based approach in accordance with Article 143 CRR
IT                        the collection of all relevant IT systems in the sense of Article 142 of the CRR
ITS on supervisory        Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/227 of 9 January 2015 amending Implementing
reporting                 Regulation (EU) No 680/2014 laying down implementing technical standards with regard to
                          supervisory reporting of institutions according to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European
                          Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 48, 20.2.2015, p. 1)
JST                       joint supervisory team according to Article 3 of the SSM Framework Regulation
LEI                       Legal Entity Identifier, https://www.gleif.org
LGD                       loss given default in accordance with Article 4(1)(55) of the CRR
LGD-in-default            loss given default in accordance with Article 4(1)(55) of the CRR for defaulted exposures
monitoring period         each quarter for which the monitoring template should be submitted to the respective JST as
                          described in Chapter 10
monitoring template       template “monitoring_template_[LEICode]_[NrPeriod].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
N_min                     minimum absolute size of the sample where sampling is applied as set out in Section 7.2.2
NCA                       national competent authority according to Article 4(1)(40) of the CRR
observation date          date at which the status of all obligors is determined in order to set the denominator for the calculation
                          of default or cure rates; unless stated differently, 31 December of each year is assumed to be the
                          observation date
                       Implementation of the new definition of default - Glossary/list of abbreviations                          102

observation period            period over which the status of all obligors is determined in order to set the denominator for the
                              calculation of default or cure rates
ODR                           observed default rate, see “default rate”
PD                            probability of default in accordance with Article 4 (1)(54) of the CRR
portfolio                     range of application of the corresponding rating system
PPU                           permanent partial use according to Article 150 of the CRR
qualitative impact template   template “qual_impact_template_[LEICode]_[Nr].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
quantitative impact           template “quant_impact_template_[LEICode].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
template
reference date                date as at which all simulations and portfolio reports should be run unless stated differently – the
                              reference date is set to 31 December 2017
registry template             template “registry_template_[LEICode].xlsx” as provided by the ECB
relevant types of exposures all types of exposures in scope to which a certain definition of default is applied
Delegated Regulation          Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/171 of 19 October 2017 on supplementing Regulation
                              (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical
                              standards for the materiality threshold for credit obligations past due (OJ L 32, 6.2.2018, p. 1)
DR 529/2014 / Delegated       Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/942 of 4 March 2015 amending Delegated Regulation
Regulation 529/2014           (EU) No 529/2014 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of
                              the Council as regards regulatory technical standards for assessing the materiality of extensions and
                              changes of internal approaches when calculating own funds requirements for market risk (OJ L 154,
                              19.6.2015, p. 1)
RW(E)A                        risk weighted exposure amount in accordance with Articles 113 and 151 of the CRR
SA                            Standardised Approach for credit risk in accordance with Part Three, Title II, Chapter 2 of the CRR
significant supervised        significant supervised entity as defined in Article 2(16) of the SSM Framework Regulation
entity
significant supervised        significant supervised group as defined in Article 2(22) of the SSM Framework Regulation
group
SSM                           single supervisory mechanism according to Article 2(9) of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of
                              15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies relating
                              to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (OJ L 287, 29.10.2013, p. 63)
SSM Framework Regulation Regulation (EU) No 468/2014 of the European Central Bank of 16 April 2014 establishing the
                              framework for cooperation within the Single Supervisory Mechanism between the European Central
                              Bank and national competent authorities and with national designated authorities (OJ L 141,
                              14.5.2014, p. 1)
TRIM                          targeted review of internal models
a                             minimum relative size of the sample where sampling is applied as set out in Section 7.2.2
                           Implementation of the new definition of default - Glossary/list of abbreviations                        103

