EBF analysis of ECB guides to internal models
Credit risk
                                              1

Please follow these instructions:
• Fill in the column “Section” only with one of the following options:
            <U+25AA> 1 for Scope of the credit risk chapter
            <U+25AA> 2 for Data maintenance for the IRB approach
            <U+25AA> 3 for Data requirements
            <U+25AA> 4 for Probability of default
            <U+25AA> 5 for Loss given default
            <U+25AA> 6 for Conversion factors
            <U+25AA> 7 for Model-related MoC
            <U+25AA> 8 for Review of estimates
            <U+25AA> 9 for Calculation of maturity for non-retail exposures
• Fill in the column “Type of comment” only with one of the following options:
            <U+25AA> Amendment
            <U+25AA> Clarification
            <U+25AA> Deletion
                                                                               2

#  Section Paragraph Page Type of comment         Detailed comment           Concise statement as to why your
                                                                               comment should be taken on
                                                                                             board
  Foreword     3      3      Amendment    The ECB should specify that the    The ECB Guide refers to several EBA
                                          draft guidelines and non-voted      mandates to develop level 2 texts,
                                          RTS will not apply until they are    which are not yet in final version.
                                          finalised.                         Therefore banks are not expected to
                                                                             be compliant with articles which are
                                                                                      not legally binding.
                                                                                                                     Formatted: (none)
                                          We are wondering how the TRIM                                              Formatted: Left
                                          guide articulate relative to the
                                          regulatory texts. When the TRIM                                            Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                                                                     color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                          guide goes beyond regulatory
  Foreword                                texts, it can brought both                                                 Formatted Table
                                          clarifications and additional                                              Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                          requirements. Institutions have                                            color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                          difficulties to know which text is                                         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                          the reference one.                                                         color: Auto, English (Ireland)
     2.4     14-29    5      Amendment    Data Quality : the general         The general framework is considered
                                                                                                                     Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                          framework is considered as very      as very burdensome. Besides we        color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                          burdensome. Besides we suggest      suggest more alignment wih BCBS
                                                                                                                     Formatted: English (Ireland)
                                          more alignment with BCBS 239.          239 requirements to ensure
                                          More specifically, a new            consistent implementation of data      Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                          paragraph should be inserted                 quality standards.            color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                          (before §14) spécifying that all
                                          requirements only apply to
                                          Critical Data Element (CDE).
                                                                                                                   3

1 2.2.1 Item 6 6 Clarification/deletion The ECB expectation that Banks       It is not relevant to require banks to
                                        should keep a register that           save all current and past version of
                                        include all current and past           elements of a rating system. This
                                        version of elements of a rating       should be harmonized with EBA PD
                                        system, among others a) models          and LGD GL and IRB assessment
                                        data flow /from data entry to                     methodology.
                                        reporting and for both historical
                                        and current data….
                                        It seems not relevant to save data
                                        unlimited back in time. Data
                                        storage etc. could alternatively be
                                        harmonised with general and
                                        absolute limits or requirements as
                                        in accounting? (10 years max), IRB
                                        assessment methodology (page
                                        12) only states 3 years for register
                                        of rating systems that includes
                                        documentation on the design and
                                        operational details of the rating
                                        system. It should not be required
                                        to save or maintain a register
                                        longer than necessary for the
                                        purpose, besides rating models
                                        may also be replaced to more
                                        updated from time to time. There
                                        should be a distinction between
                                        well-documented, as described in
                                        the assessment methodology
                                        (page 17), and unlimited. Ref also
                                        CRD IV article 109.2 ….data and
                                        information relevant to the
                                        purpose of supervision 2can be
                                                                                                                    4

                                produced…. (guess this is not
                                related to length of data series,
                                ref. DT estimates)
2 2.2.2  Item 7 7 amendment     …. The implementation of the            Errorfree should be amended to
                                models is successful and                   “substantively errorfree “ to
                                errorfree……Banks will follow           harmonise the wording with EBA.
                                rules related to accuracy and
                                completeness there will not be
                                complete errorfree models,
                                instead it should include the
                                wording substantively error-free,
                                as e.g. stated in the GL
                                assessment methododoly article
                                76. Banks measures e.g. MoCs or
                                make other measures in
                                accordance with EBA GL og PD
                                and LGD, if errors. The same
                                terminology as EBA should be
                                mentioned.
3  2.3  Item 13 8 clarification The term “IT-owner” is not            GL11 does only list all various types
                                mentioned in IRB assessment          of risks, but not how banks in details
                                methodology, or CRR or PD, LGD       should organize. It should be clarified
                                GL. Does banks have a clear           if “IT-owner” is the correct term to
                                opinion on this definition – Is this                   use.
                                definition needed? There may be
                                system owners, data-owners,
                                …Banks should use the
                                appropriate definition according
                                to internal structures and their
                                defined split of responsibilities.
                                                                                                             5

4     2     15a, 17, 18 9-10 Clarification   In paragraphs 15a and 17 it is     Establishing an independent unit just
                                                  stated that data quality       for data quality management would
                                             management activities shall be         provoke unproportionally high
                                            independent of data processing        administrative burdens and is not
                                           activities. According to Paragraph      required in the referenced legal
                                           18 it is considered “good practice                background.
                                                  […] to have a dedicated
                                              independent unit […] for the
                                            management of data quality”. It
                                                 should be clarified that a
                                           completely independent unit with
                                            exclusively dedicated staff etc. is
                                                       not obligatory.
5 2.4.2 and   11 and         clarification     «Data quality management         The term must be narrowed to what
    more     following                         framework», this definition      is in scope, data quality with regards
               pages                       should be more precise – assume      to rating models, parameters etc….or
                                              this relates to internal model       does it mean with regards to the
                                            parameters? Such a “framework                    whole bank.
                                           requirement” is not mentioned in
                                            GL 11 (?). The GL on PD and LGD,
                                                  and the IRB assessment
                                             methodology for IRB set clear
                                              expectations to accuracy and
                                              completeness and more, but
                                                gueass that is then maybe
                                                  aggregated to a quality
                                                management framework.
                                                                                                                       6

                       Vetting data inputs to the model implies to
                                                                                                                   Formatted Table
                           get access to the data which could be
                        extremely difficult and expensive. Rating
                          agencies disclose a description of their
                                                                      The details of external scores and implied
  36 15  Amendment     approach (inc main hypothesis). However
                                                                         models are not publicly disclosed.
                      they do not provide pubilc with the detailed
                         formula. Therefore the ECB should take
                          into account this limitation and limit the
                           reference to controls on external data.
                      The previous comments regarding                 Requirements on external scores
                          the level of disclosure required           might compromise their adoption in
3                              for external data apply in                            the future
                        particular in the case of external
                        credit bureau scores. In addition
                       information on the structure and
  37 16 Clarification       nature of external scores and
                        their key drivers are required by
                        par. 37(b)-(e) but are usually not
                              reported by credit bureau.
                      This would hinder the recourse to
                        a typically powerful data source
                        for risk differentiation purposes,
                       limiting, in violation of regulatory
                         requirements themselves, both
                      accuracy of the estimates and the
                       information completeness of the
                        rating system (the Credit Bureau
                        are usually relevant information
                      for rating assignment especially in
                                the “through-the-door”
                         evaluation for new clients/new
                        applications on Retail segment).
                         Therefore we suggest to better
                      clarify and describe in the detail a
                       minimum set of information that
                           are necessary to be disclosed,
                                                                                                                 7

                                                      eventually foreseeing on this a
                                                     dedicated Guidelines subject to a
                                                       consultation process target to
                                                      both banking system and Credit
                                                               Bureaus itself.
6   3.3. Item 37 f)  16         clarification         Use of external scores/ratings –    Clarification, how the replication is
                                                    why should external scores not be    espected implemented in relation to
                                                     replicated( in an internal format),    possible other factors included.
                                                        should it always add internal
                                                                   factors ?
7 3      34,35Par.  1516 ClarificationClarification Generally speaking, we deem that     11Requirements on external bureau
            3.3                                     the analyses requested in section        data might compromise their
                                                    3.2 for the use of external data             adoption in the future
                                                    might be likely not sustainable,
                                                    since they entails a level of
                                                    disclosure closed to the one
                                                    available for internal data (for
                                                    example representativeness
                                                    analysis of par. 35). This
                                                    disclosure level is usually not
                                                    possible for data providers. In
                                                    practice, these requirements, if
                                                    read as for the current
                                                    formulation reported in the draft
                                                    Guide, might lead to the
                                                    impossibility of adopting external
                                                    data (unless with the systematic
                                                    introduction of a material Margin
                                                    of Conservativism not linked to a
                                                    model deficiency, but only to the
                                                    limited disclosure of external
                                                    providers). In particular, for
                                                                                                                                8

shadow rating models, the
external data, which are the
target of the estimation, are
expected to be structurally not
perfectly representative of the
application portfolio (because
rating agencies cover more US
companies than EU ones).
  Moreover, inconsistency arises
    with the top down approach
 foreseen in EBA/CP/2018/10 (on
       the conditions to allow
  institutions to calculate KIRB in
  accordance with the purchased
    receivables approach under
 Article 255 of CRR), in which the
methodological approach is based
 on the use of external data, due
to the impossibility to leverage on
    internal ones. Therefore the
      analyses required by ECB
   guidelines jeopardize the new
 securitization framework aiming
  at revamping the securitization
         business in Europe.
   Moreover inconsistency arises
    with the top down approach
 foreseen in EBA/CP/2018/10 (on
       the conditions to allow
  institutions to calculate KIRB in
  accordance with the purchased
    receivables approach under
 Article 255 of CRR), in which the
                                    9

methodological approach will rely
  predominantly on external data,
given the impossibility to leverage
      on internal ones being not
    representative of the scope of
      this model. Therefore the
       analyses required by ECB
   guidelines might likely limit the
        workability of the new
  securitization framework aiming
      at revamping, as for Basel
     Committee intendments, the
        securitization business.
Generally speaking, we deem that
 the analyses requested in section
    3.2-3.3 for the use of external
     data/scores/ratings might be
  likely not sustainable, since they
entails a level of disclosure closed
   to the one available for internal
          data (for example
    representativeness analysis of
   par. 35). This disclosure level is
     usually not possible for data
     providers. In practice, these
   requirements, if read as for the
   current formulation reported in
 the draft Guide, might lead to the
 impossibility of adopting external
  data (unless with the systematic
introduction of a disproportionate
    Margin of Conservativism not
                                      10

                 linked to a model deficiency, but
                  only to the limited disclosure of
                   external providers). This would
                 hinder the recourse to a typically
                     powerful data source for risk
                differentiation purposes, limiting,
                        in violation of regulatory
                  requirements themselves, both
                accuracy of the estimates and the
                 information completeness of the
                 rating system (the Credit Bureau
                  are usually relevant information
                for rating assignment especially in
                         the “through-the-door”
                  evaluation for new clients/new
                  applications on Retail segment).
                Therefore we suggest to 88better
                clarify and describe in the detail a
                 minimum set of information that
                    are necessary to be disclosed,
                   eventually foreseeing on this a
                 dedicated Guidelines subject to a
                    consultation process target to
                  both banking system and Credit
                              Bureaus itself.
                 Vetting data inputs to the model implies to
                                                                                                            Formatted Table
                    get access to the data which could be
                 extremely difficult and expensive. Rating
                   agencies disclose a description of their
                                                              The details of external scores and implied
36 15 Amendment  approach (inc main hypothesis). However
                                                                 models are not publicly disclosed.
                they do not provide pubilc with the detailed
                  formula. Therefore the ECB should take
                   into account this limitation and limit the
                    reference to controls on external data.
                                                                                                         11

8   3  42c  18     Amendment       Point c of paragraph 42 requires    In general, this requirement goes far
                                 institutions participating in a pool    beyond an assessment of internal
                                  model to align their processes for    models. We do not see a legal basis
                                 managing distressed obligors. This             for such a provision.
                                 would constitute an intrusion into
                                  the business operations of these
                                 institutions. Moreover, the link to
                                      PD estimations is not clear
                                                 anyway.
                                 This requirement should be
                                 deleted.
9 3   42(d) 18 DeletionAmendment    In our opinion the extract “[…]     Validation requirement on gGroup-     Formatted: English (Belgium)
                                     Validation of the pool model,       wide models not consistent with
                                 including testing of discriminatory    gGroup-wide nature of the models
                                     power and predictive power,                     themselves
                                       should be applied by each
                                 institution on its own portfolio.” if
                                  read in connection with footnote
                                  21 should be removed. Indeed in
                                   the case of pooled model across
                                 legal entities of the same banking
                                    group (i.e. Groupwide models)
                                    the perimeter of application is
                                 related to the entire group/group
                                    of entities. As such it should be
                                     estimated (and consequently
                                       validated) on a groupwide
                                          perimeter. Thus the
                                    measurement of rank ordering
                                    and predictive power at single
                                  legal entity level would provide a
                                    partial (and potentially biased)
                                   view. We propose the following
                                                                                                           12

                    amendment of footnote 21:”The
                         paragraphs below are also
                           relevant in cases where
                    institutions use pooled data that
                      are generated from institutions
                      belonging to the same banking
                    group, with exception of models
                    developed and applied at overall
                       group level, on perimeters for
                     which the geographical location
                       of the booking is not relevant.
3.7 48 19 Amendment  We suggest to delete the end of       The application of MoC is fully
                        the paragraph "To this end,     detailed in the EBA Guidelines on PD-
                    where human judgement is used       LGD estimation and the treatment of
                     to greater extent because of the        defaulted exposures. These
                    low number of available internal     Guidelines do not mention "human
                    observations, institutions should   judgement used to a greater extent"
                        apply a higher MoC to their         in the identified deficiencies
                          estimates to account for
                        additional uncertainty". The
                         application of MoC is fully
                    detailed in the EBA Guidelines on
                        PD-LGD estimation and the
                           treatment of defaulted
                     exposures. The chapter 4.4.1 of
                        these Guidelines especially
                     paragraph 37 does not mention
                       "human judgement used to a
                     greater extent" in the identified
                    deficiencies. Also, institutions do
                      not consider the use of human
                    judgement as a deficiency but an
                     additional input to complement
                                                                                            13

                                          modelling effort. Therefore, we
                                         consider the ECB's proposition as
                                         unduly justified, not in respect of
                                                the Single Rulebook.
10   4        52     21   Amendment      The required model validation on    These requirements are not included
                                          sub-portfolio level would create     in the existing legal background.
                                         massive additional burdens while      Furthermore, the added value of
                                              the gain of knowledge is           these provisions is rather low
                                           questionable. For example, we       compared to the huge additional
                                           doubt that splitting portfolios         efforts to be made by the
                                             geographically is not really                  institutions.
                                         meaningful in the case of globally
                                                 active borrowers.
                                        Model validation on sub-portfolio
                                        level should therefore not be
                                        considered obligatory.
11 4.1.1     Risk   21-22 clarification Minimum risk drivers are set by      Risk drivers should be harmonized to
           drivers,                     ECB, while EBA GLs state that risk   a common value range in EBA GL PD
         item 50-52                     drivers may vary in points of time                   and LGD
                                        and that they should be
                                        adequate, however, lists some in
                                        5.2.2 (PD, LGD GL). Hope there
                                        are expert comments from
                                        members here if there are
                                        material differences.
                                                                                                                 14

12 4 54 – 56 22, 23 Amendment      The definition of a grade or pool    Banks use grades/pools to manage
                                         fails to account for the           risk and to manage individual
                                   behavioural element of grade or               borrowers/facilities.
                                    pool assignment. For example,
                                   the credit management process        Risk is characterised not only by PD
                                       may distinguish between           (for example) in a given economic
                                        ‘Satisfactory’ grades and          scenario but also its direction,
                                  ‘Criticised’ grades. It may be the           procyclicality and type of
                                  case that a satisfactory grade and       management best applied to it.
                                  a criticised grade share the same
                                   or similar LRA. Notwithstanding      The wording of paragraphs 54 – 56
                                       this, these grades are not        may be interpreted to restrict the
                                    homogeneous with each other.         use of masterscales and/or credit
                                      The behaviour of each class             management techniques.
                                   (satisfactory or criticised) can be
                                   expected to be different over an    The wording of paragraphs 54 – 56 is
                                             economic cycle.            inconsistent with similar PDs being
                                                                            arrived at via different rating
                                          The principles of risk                       systems.
                                       differentiation need to be
                                    broader than only numerically
                                                  defined.
13 4  55(a)   22    Clarification “Separate targets and tolerances
                                       may be defined for initial
                                       development and ongoing
                                  performance”: please clarify that
                                   this permits lower standards for
                                      ongoing performance post-
                                               development.
                                                                                                            15

14       4       55(a)  22   Clarification   Clarify that different targets and
                                               tolerances may be applied to
                                                different models/portfolios.
   4.1 Structure 58-59 23-24 Clarification   With regard to the homogeneity
   of PD models                                 within rating grades and the
                                                differentiation across rating
                                             grades or pool tests, we expect
                                            additional clarifications about the
                                             analysis to be performed in case
                                             of Low Default Portfolios (LDPs).
                                           Indeed, if the number of observed
                                              defaults is too low, the results
                                              could lead to counterintuitive
                                            outcomes. Moreover, in order to
                                             obtain more robust results, one
                                                 could decide to aggregate
                                                adjacent rating grades with
                                               potential problems arising in
                                            terms of excessive concentration
                                            or in terms of stability across the
                                                             years.
15       4        59    24   Amendment          As with comment 1 above:        Grades/pools may represent more
                                                                                than just a numerical PD. Examples
                                             The definition of a grade or pool include: (1) obligors/facilities with
                                                   fails to account for the     different risk drivers, assessed by
                                             behavioural element of grade or different rating systems but assigned
                                             pool assignment. For example,      to the same PD grade. (2)
                                             the credit management process Obligors/facilities subject to the
                                                 may distinguish between        same rating system but with
                                                  ‘Satisfactory’ grades and     additional behavioural characteristics
                                            ‘Criticised’ grades. It may be the influencing their credit management
                                                                                                                     16

                      case that a satisfactory grade and   and/or affecting their expected
                       a criticised grade share the same   future behaviour such as
                       or similar LRA. Notwithstanding     ‘satisfactory’ vs. ‘criticised’.
                            this, these grades are not
                        homogeneous with each other.
                          The behaviour of each class
                       (satisfactory or criticised) can be
                       expected to be different over an
                                  economic cycle.
                               The principles of risk
                           differentiation need to be
                        broader than only numerically
                                     defined.
4 61 24 Clarification    It is not clear the meaning of                                        Formatted: English (Ireland)
                           "including drivers that are                                         Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Not Bold, English (Ireland)
                         predictive over a longer time
                         horizon" as requested by par.                                         Formatted: Font: 11 pt, English (Ireland)
                          61(a) and how the 2/3 year                                           Formatted: English (Ireland)
                        horizon indicated in par. 61(b)                                        Formatted: English (Ireland)
                          should be embedded in the
                                                                                               Formatted: English (Ireland)
                       modelling framework. Moreover
                           if this paragraph has to be                                         Formatted: English (Ireland)
                      interpreted as requirement to set
                        as development target a multi-
                             year default status, the
                       interactions of this requirement
                        with model validation and with
                             IFRS 9 models (in which
                      regulatory PDs are used as input)
                             are not clear. Given this
                          interpretation, a significant
                              increase in the model
                                                                                            17

                                    development complexity with
                                     respect to the requirements
                                     stated in EBA/GL/2017/16 is
                                                expected.
16 4 61(b) 24 Amendment/Deletion   The proposed horizon of 2 to 3        Formatted: English (Belgium)
                                       years is provided without
                                       justification. Instead the
                                   underlying desired property or
                                     principle should be required.
                                   What criteria should be used to
                                      determine the appropriate
                                                horizon?
                                 The choice of a two to three years
                                    horizon is not duly justified. It
                                     might depend on the type of
                                     portfolio which is modelled.
                                  We suggest deleting bullet point
                                                   (b).
17 4  61   24    Amendment        Paragraph 61 appears to limit or
                                  prescribe a model philosophy. Is
                                         this the ECB’s intent?
                                    If so, can this intent be stated
                                          more clearly and the
                                   characteristics of an acceptable
                                        rating system provided?
                                                                      18

18 4  64   25 Clarification  Please clarify the treatment of a
                                 guaranteed party, entering
                                   financial difficulty, whose
                              obligations are met in full by its
                                guarantor. Is the guaranteed
                            party deemed to have defaulted?
19 4 78(b) 29 Amendment        No clarification is provided for
                            cases where the portfolio in scope
                             of the rating system is volatile in
                               its composition. For example,
                              exposures to other banks or to
                            sovereigns. As even facilities with     Formatted: English (Ireland)
                              no exposures where there is no        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                              commitment at reference date          color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                              may default during the year, an
                            exclusion of those exposures may
                             seem in some cases inapropriate        Formatted: English (Belgium)
20 4  80   30 Clarification       Paragraph 80 requires the
                                  institutions to analyse any
                            differences between external and
                            internal observed average default
                              rates. It is mentioned that this
                                 analysis should include the
                                 adequacy of the Margin of
                             Conservatism (MoC). We do not
                               see the link here. It should be
                             clarified that diverging observed
                              default rates do not necessarily
                                give reason to raise an MoC.
                                                                 19

21       4         83   31 Clarification    The intent of this paragraph is
                                               unclear. Is a specific model
                                         philosophy being prescribed? Is a
                                           specific test for grade PDs being
                                                        prescribed?
    4.2 PD risk   85-86 32 Clarification     Some clarifications should be
   quantification                             provided about the mapping
                                            between internal and external
                                             ratings. Indeed, the following
                                            aspects should be considered:
                                             - no full disclosure is available
                                             about the criteria used by the
                                                 external organizations;
                                            - the set of "common obligors"
                                             could be very small: the rated
                                             counterparties by an external
                                           organization (e.g. rating agency)
                                            are usually a small share of the
                                         specific Institutions' portfolio (e.g.
                                           Large Corporate or Institutions);
                                          - the sample of common obligors
                                            could be non representative of
                                              the application portfolio (for
                                         example, for the reason described
                                                 at the previous point);
                                             Moreover, it is not clear if the
                                            mapping should be based on a
                                                comparison between the
                                             observed default rates for the
                                           internal and the external rating
                                           grades or according to a general
                                              coherence between the two
                                                                                20

                    evaluations (e.g. determine which
                      is the prevailing internal rating
                       grade for each external rating
                    grade). However, in such analysis,
                          a certain degree of human
                           judgment (expert-based
                     approach) should be allowed, in
                       particular if the sample under
                      evaluation is small or with few
                                    defaults.
                     Finally, ECB should clarify if this
                    section (e.g. article 85-86) should
                       also be applied if the mapping
                      between internal and external
                         rating classes is used by the
                          Institutions not for the PD
                    quantification but for managerial
                        purposes or process-related
                       phase (e.g. override process).
4.2 87 34 Amendment   Overally, the requirements are     The calculation of default rates on
                      deemed overly conservative. In      sub-ranges of application is not
                     particular, bullet point (f) should              justified
                       be deleted. The calculation of
                       default rates on sub-ranges of
                       application is not justified for
                      several reasons. For modelling
                     reasons, institutions may gather
                       several portfolios in the same
                     model (for example a model on
                        Large Corporate). Therefore,
                      some sub-range portfolios may
                        suffer from low volumetry of
                                    defaults.
                                                                                             21

                                                                            Formatted Table
5.1 Realised                         The wording “exceptional cases”        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
             96  37   Clarification
    LGD                                        is not clear enough          color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                            Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                            color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                     The guide refers to the “artificial    Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    cash flow” method of the EBA GL,        color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                       which were indeed included in        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                     the final EBA GL, but not present      color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                        in the consultative paper. The
                                                                            Formatted: Font color: Blue
                                          ‘artificial cash flow’ method
                                      should be applied as described        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    only when economically justified.       color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                      It should be allowed in justified
5.1 Realised                                                                Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
             97  38   Clarification        cases to use a realised loss
    LGD                                                                     color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                         (before costs) of 0 for cured
                                     cases. For example in the case of      Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    mortgage loans that are in default      color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                      due to contagion from another         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    loan and that are repaid normally       color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                       there is no economic loss. The       Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                         ‘artificial cash flow’ method,     color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                        however, would mechanically
                                         imply such an economic loss
5.1 Realised 96 37-38 Amendment       The LGD computation at facility       Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
    LGD                                level is a general principle that
                                                                            Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                         can be shared. Nevertheless,
                                    there can be some cases where a         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                     more aggregated computation is         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                          necessary not only due to a       Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                         legally enforceable recovery
                                          process but also for the mix
                                                                         22

                                         effects of the cash flows
                                  recorded. This is in particular the
                                      case of Short-Term products
                                  where often the effects recorded
                                   on the current account are also
                                   the result of the combination of
                                    other short term facilities (i.e.
                                 self-liquidating invoices where the
                                       effects are reflected in the
                                    current account) and is not an
                                       exceptional deviation but a
                                     "structural" practice. For this
                                   reason a separate computation
                                 for those cases would result in an
                                      incorrect economic loss. An
                                        amendment to the Article
                                    proposed could include among
                                         the cases where a more
                                       aggregated computation is
                                  allowed also the cases where the
                                   bank can demonstrate that LGD
                                     by facility would not correctly
                                     reflect the real economic loss
                                  observed and therefore illustrate
                                       that it is not an exceptional
                                       deviation but a "structural"
                                                  practice.
5.1 Realised 97 - a 38 Amendment    It should be clearly underlined
    LGD                           that a coherent approach has to
                                 be adopted between LGD and CCF
                                      on the additional drawings.
                                     Therefore if it is requested to
                                   discount additional drawings in
                                                                      23

the LGD, the same approach has
    to be applied for CCF. The
       following paragraph:
   "Where institutions include
  additional drawings after the
  moment of default to estimate
 CCFs, these additional drawings
  discounted to the moment of
     default are added to the
outstanding amount at default in
  the denominator (paragraphs
139-142 of the EBA GL on PD and
LGD). In other words, institutions
should ensure that the exposure
    used for CCF estimation is
consistent with the denominator
            of the LGD."
                with
   "Where institutions include
  additional drawings after the
  moment of default to estimate
 CCFs, these additional drawings
  discounted to the moment of
     default are added to the
outstanding amount at default in
  the denominator (paragraphs
139-142 of the EBA GL on PD and
 LGD). The discounted additional
drawings have to be included as
  well in the CCF calculation. In
                                   24

                               other words, institutions should
                             ensure that the exposure used for
                              CCF estimation is consistent with
                                 the denominator of the LGD."
    5.1.3    98 39 Amendment     It should be clarified that the
Realised LGD                       restructuring involves only
                              previously defaulted facilities or
                                   cases where the measures
                              granted determine the default of
                             the customer and not commercial
                                    practices where the bank
                                    modifies the contractual
                             conditions without classifying the
                               client as a default. For example
                              the renegotiation of the interest
                              rate with a Performing customer
                             does not determine automatically
                             the default and therefore must be
                                out of the scope of this Article.
                              Given this premise, the following
                              section "where institutions open
                             new facilities to replace previously
                                  defaulted facilities as part of
                                 restructuring or for technical
                              reasons, the realised loss should
                             reflect the decrease in the degree
                                 of financial obligation arising
                               from changes in the contractual
                                     conditions (i.e. material
                               forgiveness or postponement of
                              payment of principal, interest, or
                                                                  25

                              fees). The amount by which the
                                   financial obligation has
                              diminished should be calculated
                           under paragraph 51 of the EBA GL
                                 on the definition of default."
                            seems to contradict the principle
                                of economic loss. In fact, the
                            changes in contractual conditions
                              are not reflected in a cash flow
                                 but are related to a financial
                           concept which is in general out of
                                the LGD scope. It is therefore
                              requested to amend this Article
                                  to be compliant with the
                                  economic loss definition.
                                       On PD and LGD GL               Formatted Table
                           (EBA/GL/2017/16), paragraph 14 says
                           that for the purpose of quantification
                              of various risk parameters within a
                               rating system, institutions should
                             apply the same definition of default
5  100   39  Clarification   for the same historical observations
                            used in different models. Institutions
                                  should also apply the same
                            treatment of multiple defaults of the
                                same obligor or exposure across
                              internal, external and pooled data
                                            sources.
5 100(a) 39 Amendment           We consider that setting the
                                period length at 9 months is
                               arbitrary but is a long enough
                                 period to collect connected
                                   defaults. We think that
                               considering a longer period of
                                                                   26

                           time without any given time
                               horizon is not relevant.
                        Moreover, these requirements go
                         beyond what is required by CRR
                                     and EBA GL
22 5 100(b) 40 Deletion       The analyses required on          Overlap of independence period
                                independence period              appropriateness with probation
                            appropriateness, based on         period one. In case that deletion is
                           analysis related to the curing     not accepted, we would like to ask
                        process, are basically overlapped           the following clarification:
                            with the same analysis and              “For historical data where         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                              monitoring foreseen for          institutions have not adopted the       color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                        probation period, on top of which         minimum 12-month probation
                         the independence period should        period on distressed restructured
                        be applied, within the EBA GL on      facilities under paragraph 72 of the
                                 Definition of Default        EBA GL on the definition of default,
                           (EBA/GL/2016/07 - par. 76).          they should consider a 21-month
                           Therefore requiring a further           period for the application of
                         analysis on this, considering also   paragraph 101 of the EBA GL on PD
                                the critical and highly        and LGD. The 12-month probation
                             questionable asymmetric        period is a peculiar approach applied
                              treatment introduced by              for Unlikely to pay Forborne
                             independence period (i.e.             positions; nevertheless, the
                         relevant for LGD but not for PD),  identification of Forborne positions is
                        would result in a low value added      quite recent in the IT systems as a
                           effort required to the Banks.    consequence of regulatory principles
                                                                 and does not coincide with the
                                                                 former distressed restructured
                                                             facilities. It is therefore requested to
                                                             clarify how the pro-forma correction
                                                               has to be applied on the historical
                                                              series: has the 21-month period for
                                                                                                    27

                                                                     the default windows grouping to be
                                                                         applied for all the customers
                                                                      classified as "Restructured" even if
                                                                      they are a larger sample compared
                                                                         to currently Forborne rules?
   5.2                                 We suggest to delete this                                              Formatted: Font color: Red, English (United States)
                                  paragraph. The performance of
                                                                                                              Formatted: English (United States)
                                 models should be assessed on the
                                 full range of application of rating                                          Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                                                              color: Red, English (United States)
                                        systems. Assessing the
                                   performance on sub-ranges of                                               Formatted Table
                                   application could lead to hasty
                                 conclusions as the portfolio used
                                                                      The calculation of default rates on     Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                     in the calibration will not be
           103     41   Deletion                                        sub-ranges of application is not      color: Red, English (United States)
                                    replicated on the backtesting
                                                                                     justified                Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    exercises. Also, for modelling
                                  reasons, institutions may gather                                            color: Red, English (United States)
                                    several portfolios in the same                                            Formatted: English (United States)
                                  model (for example a model on                                               Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                    Large Corporate). Therefore,                                              color: Red, English (United States)
                                   some sub-range portfolios may
                                                                                                              Formatted: English (United States)
                                    suffer from low volumetry of
                                                defaults.                                                     Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                                                              color: Red, English (United States)
 5.2 LGD  105 - b 42-43 Deletion The model component approach
structure                         is designed to capture different                                            Formatted: English (United States)
                                  aspects of the recovery process                                             Formatted: Font color: Red, English (United States)
                                      and allows to obtain a LGD
                                   estimate which is the result of
                                       both losses observed and
                                     dynamics of cure/migrations
                                      within default statuses and
                                 between default and non-default.
                                                                                                           28

                                     The request to demonstrate
                                      independence among the
                                 components is not clear and not
                                  coherent with other regulatory
                                    prescriptions. The goal of the
                                  model components is different
                                and also the drivers tested are, in
                                 general, different; the burden of
                                  proof for institutions to provide
                                      empirical evidence of their
                                 independence has to be deleted
                                          from the document.
  5.3 Risk     108 44 Amendment §108 indicates that the minimum        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
quantification                   period of time during which the       color: Red, English (United States)
                                    default should be observed in
                                   order for it to be considered in
                                  the calculation of the observed
                                average LGD should not be longer
                                       than 12 months. We are
                                      wondering why 12 months
                                Moreover this requirement leads
                                   to taking into account defaults
                                 with immature recovery profiles,
                                  increasing the uncertainty of th
                                   efinal outcome and potentially
                                         leads to higher LGDs.
                                    Since for recent defaults only
                                  limited information is available
                                      regarding the full recovery
                                       process, the treatment of
                                  incomplete recovery processes
                                envisaged in paragraph 158 of the
                                                                    29

   EBA GL on PD and LGD is more
         complex and could add
uncertainty to the LGD estimates;
 to mitigate this risk, institutions
 may establish a minimum period
 of time during which the default
should be observed in order for it
         to be considered in the
      calculation of the observed
   average LGD (with a maximum
 period equal to 12 months). This
 principle is correct but should be
  specified as well for institutions
    applying a model component
approach: in this case the analysis
    should be replicated not only
 from the entrance in default but
 as well from the entrance in the
    litigation process. In fact, in a
   standard approach where the
LGD is equal to Pcure*LGDcured +
(1-Pcure)*LGDnoncured, the LGD
 of non cured facilities (litigation
   process) includes as well open
facilities and the open inferenced
      cases are estimated on the
      sample of non cured cases.
 Therefore, even in these cases it
    should be allowed to exclude
positions with limited information
       from the beginning of the
  litigation phase. Finally, the 12-
month period should be extended
                                      30

                                        for the secured facilities where
                                      the realisation of the collateral at
                                       the end of the recovery process
                                             determines an even less
                                       significant contribution of young
                                                     positions.
23 5 109 44, 45      Clarification    We understand the the maximum         Banks in many Member States have
                                        period of the recovery "time to     high volumes of NPLs. As these are
                                       workout" has to be duly justified   worked out, the time-to-workout can
                                        and supported by studies. Can      be expected to extend (supported by
                                            this "time to workout" be               empirical evidence).
                                       modified over a model life cycle
                                        considering the regulatory text
                                       n°529/2014?In principle, can the
                                         ‘time-to-workout’ be revised
                                           (subject to material change
                                          procedures) within a model?
24 5 110  45         Clarification       Is vintage defined by year-of-
                                        observation-as-in-default or by
                                                 year-of-default?
25 5 111  46           Deletion        The introduction of a concept of          Risk of double counting of
                ClarificationDeletion   MRP and the adoption of 100%       conservative effect for Repossessions
                                      haircut for repossessed assets not
                                       yet sold is deemed as potentially
                                         over-conservative. Indeed We
                                          interpret this paragraph as a
                                            requirement to perform a
                                         sensitivity analysis in order to
                                              evaluate the impact of
                                                                                                               31

   repossessed asset on the LRA
     LGD. If this is the case, the
purpose of the analysis should be
    made explicit. Indeed, the
   adoption of 100% haircut for
  repossessed assets not yet sold
     (after the MRP) would be
 potentially over-conservative. As
a matter of fact the repossession,
as defined also within the EBA GL
     on PD-LGD, would entail a
 reduction of the credit exposure
in force of the value of the assets.
   Although a haircut should be
   applied on repossessed asset
     value in order to factorize
uncertainty of the collateral value
 and level of liquidity, it should be
kept in mind that the repossessed
  assets will be booked on Bank’s
 balance sheet and risk weighted
    accordingly. Thus in case of
   repossession of assets falling
      under “other non credit-
    obligation assets” category
    pursuant to CRR Article 156
  would be 100% risk-weighed in
    most of the cases. In case of
repossession of equity assets (e.g.
  due to debt to equity swap, not
      infrequent in context of
  restructuring measure) the risk
   weight would be even higher
                                      32

 (especially in view of the future
      Basel 4 context where only
Standardized Approach would be
admitted). Therefore envisaging a
     treatment like substantially
 realized incomplete workout for
 the repossessed assets that can
      take time for realization as
    similarly to ordinary cases of
      collateral execution would
    introduce a double counting
     conservative effect limiting
  therefore the rationale and the
    recourse of the repossession
technique. Indeed the more time
 a repossessed assets will remain
in the balance sheet of the Bank,
  instead of having cash in-flows,
  the more time the Bank should
pay RWA on it. Thus the adoption
    of haircut equal to 100% for
  repossessed assets not yet sold
  would end up in an increase of
   LGD (and RWA) on the credit
obligations reference portfolio as
           well, doubling the
penalization.The introduction of a
concept of MRP and the adoption
 of 100% haircut for repossessed
 assets not yet sold is deemed as
   potentially over-conservative.
     Indeed the repossession, as
defined also within the EBA GL on
                                   33

 PD-LGD, would entail a reduction
 of the credit exposure in force of
 the value of the assets. Although
   a haircut should be applied on
 repossessed asset value in order
    to factorize uncertainty of the
      collateral value and level of
liquidity, it should be kept in mind
  that the repossessed assets will
    be booked on Bank’s balance
        sheet and risk weighted
      accordingly. Thus in case of
     repossession of assets falling
        under “other non credit-
      obligation assets” category
      pursuant to CRR Article 156
   would be 100% risk-weighed in
     most of the cases. In case of
repossession of equity assets (e.g.
  due to debt to equity swap, not
        infrequent in context of
   restructuring measure) the risk
     weight would be even higher
  (especially in view of the future
      Basel 4 context where only
 Standardized Approach would be
admitted). Therefore envisaging a
      treatment like substantially
  realized incomplete workout for
  the repossessed assets that can
      take time for realization as
     similarly to ordinary cases of
       collateral execution would
                                     34

                                            introduce a double counting
                                             conservative effect limiting
                                          therefore the rationale and the
                                            recourse of the repossession
                                        technique. Indeed the more time
                                         a repossessed assets will remain
                                        in the balance sheet of the Bank,
                                          instead of having cash in-flows,
                                          the more time the Bank should
                                        pay RWA on it. Thus the adoption
                                            of haircut equal to 100% for
                                          repossessed assets not yet sold
                                          would end up in an increase of
                                           LGD (and RWA) on the credit
                                        obligations reference portfolio as
                                          well, doubling the penalization.
                                        We are in favour of maitening the      Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                           optionality as it allows to take    color: Red, English (United States)
                                             into account differences in       Formatted Table
 6.2 Realised                                 approach to typical retail
                113    46 Clarification                                        Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
     CCFs                                portfolios (rather facility based)
                                                                               color: Red, English (United States)
                                           and SME/corporate portfolios
                                         (rather based on aggregation of       Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                      facilities)”             color: Red, English (United States)
   5.3 Risk    113 - a 46 Clarification For the cases where two or more        Formatted: English (United States)
quantification                          facilities (for example mortgages)     Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                         of the same obligor are assigned      color: Red, English (United States)
                                        to the same facility grade or pool     Formatted: English (United States)
                                        we deem appropriate to have two
                                              options as compliant for         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                               color: Red, English (United States)
                                         calculating the average. The first
                                             is to compute the average         Formatted: English (United States)
                                         weighted by the total number of       Formatted: English (United States)
                                                                            35

                                    facilities within that facility grade.
                                        The second is to first take the
                                         exposure-weighted average
                                      realised LGD at the obligor level
                                        and then take the arithmetic
                                        average LGD weighted by the
                                        number of defaulted obligors
                                    within the LGD grade. Institutions
                                        should demonstrate that the
                                         approach they use does not
                                      distort the actual observed loss.
  5.3 Risk     113 - c 47 Amendment       The proposed treatment of
quantification                            outliers is not symmetrical
                                       between the two tails. On one
                                     hand paragraph 113 (b) requires
                                      to floor the left tail to 0, on the
                                          other hand this paragraph
                                          requires the right tail to be
                                         treated with an appropriate
                                         treatment (data quality, risk
                                     drivers, assignment to grades or
                                    pools or assignment to calibration
                                          segments) without capping
                                     realised LGD values. The practice
                                    widespread among institutions to
                                      replace the observed value by a
                                         pre-defined value when the
                                     observed value is above the pre-
                                        defined one already partially
                                         safeguards the symmetrical
                                      approach between the two tails
                                        and definitely allows to avoid
                                       further biases in the estimated
                                                                           36

                                       LGDs. It is not always possible to
                                          assign these outliers to one
                                      bucket or grade because they can
                                      pertain to different combinations
                                       of the risk drivers used to model
                                        the loss rates. The unintended
                                         consequence of the proposed
                                       practice could be an increase of
                                          the facilities excluded in the
                                      sample definition. We suggest to
                                           replace the proposal of the
                                          inclusion of raw data with a
                                      percentile treatment of the right
                                                        tail.
  5.3 Risk     115 - b/c 47 Amendment Same amendment and comment
quantification                            as for paragraph 105-b. The
                                        model component approach is
                                         designed to capture different
                                       aspects of the recovery process
                                           and allows to obtain a LGD
                                        estimate which is the result of
                                            both losses observed and
                                          dynamics of cure/migrations
                                           within default statuses and
                                      between default and non-default.
                                          The request to demonstrate
                                            independence among the
                                       components is not clear and not
                                        coherent with other regulatory
                                         prescriptions. The goal of the
                                        model components is different
                                      and also the drivers tested are, in
                                       general, different; the burden of
                                                                          37

                               proof for institutions to provide
                                  empirical evidence of their
                              independence has to be deleted
                                      from the document.
                                                                                                          Formatted Table
                              Paragraph 118 suggests to take into
                                   account "any changes to the
   5  118   48 Clarification    structure of the portfolio that are
                                    expected to happen in the
                                       foreseeable future".
26 5 118(c) 49  Deletion          Past economic and market           The LRA LGD should represent the
                              conditions only characterise part        long run behaviour of the LGD
                                   of an economic cycle and            parameter. Estimation of this
                                 therefore may not provide a          parameter will be biased if past
                               representative set of economic       economic and market conditions are
                               conditions for the evaluation of        not representative of the LRA.
                                             the LRA.                Adjustments should be permitted
                                                                         (supported by arguments).
27 5 120(a) 49  Deletion      The prescribed 20 year period is          Contributes to unwarranted
                             arbitrary and does not provide for              variability in RWAs.
                                 a level-playing field between
                                        Member States.
                             We note that this is subject to a
                             separate EBA consultation.
                                                                                                       38

28        5       120(a)     49   Clarification    Is the 20 year period a rolling
                                                 period, an extending period or a
                                                            fixed period?
29        5        124       51   Clarification An increase in LGD to account for        This maintains consistency of
                                                     data that does not include       language with the section on MoC
                                                 adverse economic conditions is       and also allows banks to compute
                                                 not MoC. It should be properly       the adjustment using econometric
                                                be described as an adjustment as                  modelling.
                                                      the desired estimate is a
                                                downturn estimate of LGD. MoC
                                                will also be required in addition to
                                                  this adjustment to account for
                                                possible error in this adjustment.
30        5      Par. 5.3.5 49-51   Deletion    As long as the EBA RTS and GL on       Downturn GL still in draft in EBA
                                                downturn will not be closed, and
                                                considering the strong debate on
                                                this on several critical points (e.g.
                                                adoption of the Reference Value),
                                                   this section should be, for the
                                                  time being, removed from the
                                                    current version of the Guide
         5.4       126       52   Clarification        The possibility to reflect
   Estimation of                                downturn conditions in the ELBE,
   ELBE and LGD                                   if and only if current economic
     in-default                                 conditions are in a downturn or a
                                                  downturn is expected over the
                                                period of the recovery process, is
                                                      shared by the institution.
                                                Nevertheless, we do not perceive
                                                  this approach in the inspection
                                                                                                                         39

                              practices; indeed it's a quite
                           common feeling that, until now,
                         ECB preference has been towards
                          an ELBE associated with long-run
                             average or, at most, long run
                            average corrected to take into
                               account positive economic
                           outlook and an entire downturn
                          assigned to LGD in-default not to
                         lower RWA on defaulted facilities.
                          Otherwise we deem appropriate
                           to reduce RWA (at least for the
                           Downturn share, the MoC is the
                             other one) in case of current
                             economic conditions already
                           embedded in the Expected Loss
                                     Best Estimate.
                                 We therefore ask for a
                           clarification on how to interpret
                          this issue and for more details on
                           the approach to be applied. We
                          highlight that an important issue
                            is to avoid as much as possible
                             the excessive volatility in the
                                RWAs and therefore the
                          correction to ELBE should not be
                          based on an excessively PIT logic.
31 6 132 55-56 Amendment    A strict link of the aggregation Facility aggregation rule for CCF not
                           logics of CCF to the LGD ones is     necessarily similar to LGD one
                           not fully meaningful. Indeed the
                           aggregation logic on LGD might
                            be driven by the level at which
                                 the recovery process is
                                                                                                  40

                                   performed, whereas on CCF side
                                    the aggregation logic should be
                                         driven more by potential
                                         interconnections among
                                      elementary facilities affecting
                                     each other the behavior of the
                                   drawing of the unused credit line
                                      (e.g as in the cases of current
                                  account with connected advances
                                      facilities, multipurpose credit
                                    lines where a credit limit can be
                                        shared among more credit
                                   facilities, etc). As a consequence
                                    of this not necessarily the same
                                   level of aggregation adopted on       Formatted: Left
                                   LGD might fully work on CCF and
                                                                         Formatted Table
                                  vice versa. Thus we would suggest
                                     to amend the wording making         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                  reference to possible aggregation      color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                  according to the characteristics of    Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                  the facilities rather than adopting    color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                     aggregations valid on LGD side.     Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                         color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                     We understand that regulatory
                                                                         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                    texts set rules regarding PD and
6.2 Realised                                                             Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
             133 56 Clarification  LGD calculation whereas there is
    CCFs                                                                 color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                  none as far as the CCF parameter
                                                is concerned             Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                         Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                                                                         color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                         Formatted: Font color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                                                                      41

6.2 Realised 133 - b 56 Amendment            Refer to amendment to
    CCFs                                     paragraph 97-a on LGD.
  6.3 CCF    134 - b 57 Clarification Clarification is requested between
 structure                                fixed horizon approach and
                                             cohort approach: Basel
                                             Committee on Banking
                                       Supervision has indicated the 12
                                      months fixed horizon approach as
                                       the preferred one, while, both in
                                      inspections and in this Guide, the
                                        cohort approach is requested as
                                          well. More details should be
                                             provided on this topic.
     6.3      134c   57 Clarification We understand that changes (i.e.
                                       increase) in the value of the limit
                                       for example may have an impact
                                        on the CCF. How do institutions
                                      have to consider this changes? Do
                                         they have to be considered as
                                                new credit lines?
     6.4      136    58 Amendment     The rules mentioned in article 136
                                         are additional ones to the CRR
                                      and add requirements. However,
                                         we consider that they are not
                                        sufficiently precise and they are
                                             open to interpretation
                                                                           42

    6.4 CCF risk  136 - b 58 - 59 Amendment    As for paragraph 113 - c about
   quantification                             LGD, we deem not appropriate
                                             the proposal not to cap the right
                                                  tail of the distribution. An
                                                 appropriate treatment (i.e.
                                               interquartile range) has to be
                                                performed in order to avoid
                                                biases coming from raw CCF.
32       6        136(c)    59    Amendment  it appears not immediately clear     Calculation of realized LRA CCF
                                                    the reasons behind the        seems not fully in line with CRR
                                              calculation of the LRA CCF as an      Article 182, par 1, letter a)
                                                arithmetic average of yearly
                                             average of observed CCF. Indeed
                                                  this approach results self-
                                             explaining on PD side where it is
                                               necessary to have performing
                                            obligor at the different reference
                                            dates and observing default rates
                                             on one-year horizon. But on CCF
                                            side, as for LGD, a calibration to a
                                                  default weighted long run
                                            average of all observed defaults is
                                             required by the CRR (Article 182,
                                              par. 1, letter a) “(a) institutions
                                            shall estimate conversion factors
                                               by facility grade or pool on the
                                                basis of the average realised
                                                conversion factors by facility
                                              grade or pool using the default
                                             weighted average resulting from
                                              all observed defaults within the
                                               data sources;”). Therefore we
                                                   suggest to keep a proper
                                                                                                                   43

                        alignment with CRR requirement,
                              by amending the wording
                            accordingly, in order to avoid
                         create potential inconsistency in
                              the interpretation of the
                                     requirement.
                         In addition, The rules mentioned
                         in article 136 are additional ones
                        to the CRR and add requirements.
                          However, we consider that they
                           are not sufficiently precise and
                          they are open to interpretation
33 6 136(d) 59 Deletion  we deem that this paragraph is a     Calibration concept of CCF linkage to
                        replication of the criteria valid for               PD ones
                        LRA default rate quantification on
                        PD side. However CCF, as for LGD,
                        should be calibrated at downturn
                         level (if higher than the long run)
                            thus the availability of a long
                           enough LRA CCF covering both
                             good and bad years is more
                           relevant for a sound downturn
                            estimation leveraging on the
                           availability of downturn period
                         within the time series of internal
                          data (i.e. adopting the approach
                         based on observed impact as for
                        the draft of EBA GL on downturn)
                           rather than for a calibration at
                          LRA representative of the likely
                            range of variability of default
                               which is relevant for PD.
                                                                                                  44

                                           Therefore this paragraph appears
                                              redundant and might create
                                                     confusion in the
                                           operationalization of the CCF risk
                                                      quantification.
34       6        General    Amendment      The section on CCFs is a cut and     It is not appropriate to choose
                                              paste of the section on LGD.    different downturn periods for LGD
                                                However, following the        and CCF for the same set of facilities
                                             prescribed guidance, one may       as there is a correlation between
                                              arrive at a downturn period                   LGD and CCF.
                                           different to the one used for LGD
                                               for a given set of facilities. Credit management measures could
                                                                                  be taken to reduce the CCF of
                                                                              facilities even as their LGD increases
                                                                                   during a period of economic
                                                                                 adversity. E.g. revolving credit.
                                                                                 The text should be amended to
                                                                              prescribe the same downturn period
                                                                                       for both LGD and CCF.
    6.4 CCF risk   138    60 Clarification Since this paragraph refers to the
   quantification                            Downturn LGD comments are
                                            reported above for paragraphs
                                                        119-124.
                                                                                                                   45

5 for Loss  Section     49-    Deletion    As long as the EBA RTS and GL on      Downturn GL still in draft in EBA
           5.3.5, Par. 51,60                downturn will not be closed, and
  given       138                          considering the strong debate on
 default                                   this on several critical points (e.g.
                                           adoption of the Reference Value),
                                             all the references to this topic,
                                           extended also to CCF, should be,
                                           for the time being, removed from
                                            the current version of the Guide
     7        142       61   Clarification  Margin of conservatism have to
                                           be integrated into models in case
                                              of statistical weaknesses. Do
                                            institutions have to consider the
                                           uncertainty surrounding volatility
                                              in a Margin of conservatism
                                              whereas the involved models
                                                predict it in a satisfactory
                                                          manner?
                                           Wording is not clear regarding the
                                            proposed calculation framework
                                            for statistical weaknesses as the
                                             MoC seems to depend only on
                                            observed values. It seems that a
                                              model that perfectly follows
                                              observed volatility would be
                                                penalised only because of
                                             volatility in the observations. It
                                           could be expected that rather the
                                            difference between observation
                                            and prediction is targeted by the
                                                            MoC.
                                                                                                                   46

    35         7          142   61 Clarification     It should be clarified that the
                                                  intent of this paragraph is not to
                                                     prescribe a model philosophy
                                                                 (PiT, TtC).
                                                     It should be clarified that the
                                                     intent of this paragraph is to
                                                    require a quantification of the
                                                     error in determining the LRA
                                                     based upon the length of the
                                                       timeseries from which it is
                                                               determined.
                                                         To this end, it should be
                                                   recognised that different banks
                                                   will adopt different approaches
                                                   unless a common approach can
                                                   be agreed. Examples would be
                                                                   useful.
36 si;ilqr
message                                                 The request to reflect the
  than                                                 dispersion of the statistical
following                                           estimator at grade level might
                                                  produce the following effects (in
                       7 Model-                            particular for LDP):
                        related                      - inversion of PD ordering for
           Credit Risk          61 Amendment
                       MoC §142                              adjacent classes
                          -a                     - incentive to use totally PIT rating
                                                     systems in order to minimize
                                                     variability of default rates for
                                                    each class. On the other hand,
                                                 this would increase RWA volatility
                                                    - incentive to use less granular
                                                                                       47

    Master Scale, penalizing the
     models risk differentiation
Some of the described effects are
illustrated on a practical example
     in the attached document.
    Furthermore, the request to
  consider each year's variability
    might produce the following
   effects (in particular for LDP):
 - incentive to use shorter LRA, in
  order to avoid variability of DR
 due to full covering of economic
                  cycles
- potential contradiction with the
       necessity to cover "likely
  variability of the default rates".
      It is suggested to replace:
      " to account for statistical
         uncertainty/sampling
 error affecting the LRA estimate
at grade level stemming from the
 variability of each year’s default
       rate and from the period
             considered. This
   MoC should be defined on the
   basis of the distribution of the
              estimator, i.e.
  the average default rate across
     time, and therefore reflect
            sensitivity to the
           period considered"
                                     48

                                                with:
                                    "to account for statistical
                                       uncertainty/sampling
                                 error potentially affecting the
                               model estimation at least at the
                              level of calibration segment. The
                                  MOC should account for the
                                potential variability of default
                                    rates and the number of
                              observations available for model
                                            estimation"
36 7 142 61-62 Clarification        It is unclear if the "other  Not clear explanation on MoC    Formatted: Font: (Default) +Body (Calibri), 11 pt, Font
                               estimates" refers to parts of the category C for PD parameter     color: Auto, English (Ireland)
                             model that due to the estimation
                               complexity might be considered
                                self-standing models or to any
                                parameter which represent an
                             input to the model (i.e. Downturn
                                component, indirect costs). In
                                  particular, it is unclear what
                             should measure the materiality of
                                   the uncertainty (quality of
                              parameter estimation, relevance
                                of the parameter in the model,
                                 marginal changes that a MOC
                                   might produce). Due to the
                                  complexity of the correlated
                                   effects and the undesired
                               possibility to disproportionately
                                     increase the MoC C, it is
                             requested to specify that "one for
                               all" MoC C should be computed
                              and the latter should encompass
                                                                                              49

                       all the model's estimation errors.                                              Formatted: Font color: Auto
                        we deem that the wording “[…]
                         estimate a MoC to account for
                        statistical uncertainty/sampling
                        error affecting the LRA estimate
                           at grade level […]” should be
                       better clarified. Indeed, in case of
                      adoption of a calibration by grade
                       or pools, the calculation of a MoC
                      for each grade, which seems to be
                        what required in this paragraph,
                      would be basically not sustainable
                             since it might end up in a
                         potentially high MoC the more
                         the estimation is risk sensitive
                       (and therefore the more granular
                          is the grading). Furthemore it
                       should be clarified what intended
                             for LGD and CCF with the
                            statement “[…] and, when
                            material, for the statistical
                        uncertainty that can arise from
                      the estimates used in the LGD LRA
                       and CCF LRA estimation process”
7 142(a) 61 Amendment It should be clarified that the MoC     MoC C should be independent from
                      “to account for statistical             the yearly default rate volatility and
                      uncertainty/sampling              error    should depend on number of
                      affecting the LRA estimate” should                  observations
                      be based on the number of
                      observation available rather than
                      the variability of one year DRs.
                      Indeed considering the volatility of
                      the DR as key driver in the
                                                                                                    50

computation of the MoC would
lead to the following drawbacks:
      - model with a longer
          historical time series (and
          hence an expected higher
          variability in the DR) will
          be penalised with an
          higher MoC although the
          statistical
          uncertainty/sampling
          error would be smaller
          due to the huge number
          of counterparties in the
          sample for the CT
          computation;
      - inconsistency             with
          framework for the CT
          computation designed in
          the EBA/GL/2017/16, that
          requires a CT which is
          representative of the
          likely range of variability;
      Therefore we suggest the
     following amendment: “ to
        account for statistical
     uncertainty/sampling error
  potentially affecting the LRA DR
  estimate at least at the level of
   calibration segment. The MoC
  should be based on the level of
   the LRA DR and the number of
    observations available for its
              estimation”.
                                       51

8 146 63 Clarification   The requirements of full model      Not clear explanation regarding the
                        review seem to be independent        additional analyses to be performed
                        from the deterioration evidence     in order to evaluate if a model has to
                        in terms of model performance,                 be re-estimated
                         that are already covered within
                           the regular annual review of
                            estimates, since additional
                        analyses are required in order to
                          evaluate if the inclusion of the
                         most recent data would lead to
                              different material model
                                     outcomes.
                             However poor details are
                       provided regarding the additional
                       analyses to be performed in order
                         to evaluate if a model has to be
                        re-estimated, not fully clarifying
                          the requirements of articles of
                           EBA Guidelines related to full
                        review (i.e. article 220 that asks
                             for review of existing and
                             potential risk drivers and
                          modelling overall framework).
                       The lack of clear guidelines on this
                            can determine difficulty in
                         interpretation and consequent
                        operationalization with potential
                       increase of the operative effort in
                            Model maintenance phase.
                       The risk of an excessive operative
                       effort is also linked to the request
                          of three-yearly basis (or more
                              often depending on the
                                                                                                 52

                                   materiality) model review,
                               considering that paragraph 218 of
                               EBA/GL/2017/16 already requires
                               an (at least) annually regular cycle
                                     of review of estimates.
                                    Paragraph 146 mentions
                               "material models". This wording is
                                  not mentioned in regulatory
                                               texts.
                               Could you please explain what are
                                 material models and for what
                               purpose they have to be defined?
37 8 147, 148 63 Clarification          Typographic error.
38 9   151    65 Clarification   Are exemptions from the one-
                                year maturity floor permitted?
39 5 General     Clarification   It would be helpful if the ECB
                                  would clarify that no specific
                                model philosophy is prescribed
                                              for PD.
                                                                    53

40     5     General Clarification     It would be helpful if the ECB
                                       would clarify its expectations
                                             regarding the use of
                                                Masterscales.
                                    It would be useful for the industry if    Formatted Table
                                      ECB issued a policy regarding the
                                         timeline for a model change,
                                     included the timing it will takes to
                                      send the decision (or draft letter)
   All Risks General Clarification after an application. In this way, with
                                   a deadline, banks could plan properly
                                     IT interventions, business impacts,
                                      etc ... and industry could manage
                                   updates of time series or remediation
                                            plans in timely manner.
                                                                           54

55
56
57
58
