26 September 2018
EBF_031119E
Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Table of Contents
Introduction and key messages................................................................................... 2
Detailed analysis and advice.............................................. .....................9
Market Risk ....................................................................................................................................... 11
Liquidity Risk ñ NSFR .............................................................................................................................................................. 22
Interest Rate Risk ....................................................................................................................................................................... 33
Pillar 2 ñ Supervisory Review ......................................................................................................................................... 36
Leverage Ratio ................................................................................................................................................................................ 39
Large Exposures ........................................................................................................................................................................... 46
Pillar 3 - Disclosure .................................................................................................................................................................... 49
Non performing loans .............................................................................................................................................................. 51
Treatment of Software ........................................................................................................................................................... 52
Remuneration .................................................................................................................................................................................. 56
Supporting finance and infrastructure .................................................................................................................. 64
Securitisations................................................................................................................................................................................. 71
Credit Risk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 72
Recognising the single market and banking union .................................................................................. 75
Proportionality................................................................................................................................................................................. 79
Governance ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 85
Other Issues...................................................................................................................................................................................... 94
European Banking Federation aisbl
Brussels / Avenue des Arts 56, 1000 Brussels, Belgium / +32 2 508 3711 / info@ebf.eu
Frankfurt / Weiﬂfrauenstraﬂe 12-16, 60311 Frankfurt, Germany
EU Transparency Register / ID number: 4722660838-23                                                                                                                    www.ebf.eu
1

Introduction and key messages
The EBF supports the objectives of the Risk Reduction Measures (RRM) package
to finalise the post-crisis regulatory reform agenda and strengthen the EU
prudential and resolution frameworks for banks. In the final trilogue discussions,
EU policymakers should aim to update the prudential and financial stability
framework in a way that banks are able to:
    1. Regain a competitive profile in the global financial market
    2. Support market liquidity and short term financing activities
    3. Take full advantage of the EU Single Market and the Banking Union
    4. Finance the European economy and innovation
    5. Making regulation and supervision fit for purpose and avoiding unnecessary
       burden for banks
To achieve these objectives, the EBF would like to provide the following key
recommendations which are outlined in further detail in our comprehensive
analysis and advice on the RRM trilogue positions attached in the annex (Please
note also that resolution related issues such as grandfathering, general prior
permission and breach of MREL are dealt with in a separate paper):
1.     Regain a competitive profile in the global financial market by:
    a) Adhering to the Basel timeline on FRTB (Fundamental Review of the Trading
       Book)
Key components of the FRTB are still being discussed at international level. The
Basel Committee has recognised the flaws in the calibration of the standard
published in January 2016 and is currently looking at adjusting them on an
updated version expected by the end of 2018. On 7 December 2017 the
Committee announced to defer the implementation and regularity reporting date
for the standard to 1 January 2022 to allow banks additional time to develop the
system infrastructure to apply the standard, to validate new internal models and
for the Basel Committee to address outstanding issues.
The EBF welcomes the Council General Approach of implementing FRTB in CRR II
in the EU as a reporting requirement; but we do not support any reporting
requirements of the new Standardised Approach ahead of the Basel timeline. (see
detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    b) Allowing capital instruments issued by subsidiaries located in third countries
       to be counted towards the consolidated capital requirements whenever they
       comply with local regulations that are as stringent as the EU regulation.
In order to avoid extraterritoriality issues, AT1 and T2 capital instruments issued
by subsidiaries in third countries should be able to be counted towards the
consolidated capital requirements whenever they comply with local regulations
that are as stringent as the EU regulation. In addition, we propose that for AT1
and T2 capital instruments issuances by subsidiaries in third countries, the Point-
of-non-viability is linked to the local authorityís decisions whenever the local
2
                                                                       www.ebf.eu

resolution authority has similar powers to the European resolution authority
powers. Moreover, AT1 and T2 capital instruments and minority interests issued
by intermediate holding companies in third countries should be computed as
consolidated capital requirements when these holding companies are subject to
prudential requirements as stringent as those applied to credit institutions of that
third country and those requirements are deemed equivalent to the EU regulation.
(see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    c) Adapting staff remuneration caps for digital banking employees
In the new digital environment, it is necessary to ensure a level playing field
between players where they perform the same activities. In order for banks to be
able to attract digital talent they need to change the remuneration profile in a
radical manner to compete in the Fintech environment. The EBF advocates for
more flexibility in the CRD IV to allow banks to hire digital talent on an equal
footing to other sectors by exempting start-up founders and other key digital
employees from the current remuneration caps (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
    d) Requiring the review of the Standardized Approach of the Counterparty
       Credit Risk as soon as possible
The Commission proposal leads to the transposition in Europe of a revised
framework, without any clear evaluation of the side effects of this measure. As a
consequence, the impacts of the revised CCR framework on the credit valuation
adjustment (CVA) capital requirements and on the leverage ratio (the 1.4 alpha
factor calibration should be reviewed),has not been assessed and no update of the
credit risk mitigation (CRM) framework has been considered. We support the
European Parliament and the Council proposal to amend Article 514 (CRR) in order
to confide to the EBA a report evaluating the impact and the calibration of the CCR
framework. Nevertheless, we consider the EBA report should be published earlier
than 4 years after the entry into force of CRR2 (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
       e) Support efficiency in regulatory reporting requirements
Regulatory reporting requirements have increased heavily in recent years
introduced by different authorities. Data points asked are often duplicative and
overlapping with each other and the definitions used are unclear. We strongly
support European co-legislators to find ways to improve interoperability,
efficiency, standardization and streamlining of regulatory and statistical reporting
requirements and we support co-operation between different authorities, mainly
the EBA, ECB and the SRB (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
3
                                                                      www.ebf.eu

2.           Support market liquidity by:
        e) recalibrating the Net Stable Funding Ratio to support market liquidity with
             symmetric treatment of repos and reverse repos
The NSFR is designed to reduce bank reliance on short-term wholesale funding
relative to more stable sources of funding. Short-term repo and reverse repo
transactions on HQLA collateral are essential for the bankís treasury to steer the
bankís liquidity position.
Any asymmetrical treatment between repos and reverse repos, which are essential
instruments for market making activities, would be detrimental to market liquidity,
while market liquidity is the fundamental assumption of the LCR, and to the price
of securities. A consistent treatment for Level 1 asset (essentially government
bonds) should be applied, be they owned by the bank, which are allocated a 0%
RSF, or be they obtained from reverse repo. We fully support the European
Parliament proposal on reverse repos treatment including the review clause after
2 years with no automatic fall back to the BCBS rules, but with a new EC legislative
proposal if need be (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
3.           Support short term trade receivables financing techniques by:
        f) recalibrating the Net Stable Funding Ratio to support trade finance and
             similar short term trade receivables financing techniques like factoring.
Trade finance, like all short-term trade receivables financing techniques such as
factoring), plays a key role in the real economy as it enables the financing of
commercial transactions of exporting and importing firms via lending, issuing
letters of credit or trade related guarantees. Trade finance and short-term trade
receivables financing techniques are major instruments for the financing of
European corporates. Trade finance products are generally secured against the
traded goods, self-liquidating in nature and, even in crisis conditions, pose only
limited risk to banks and overall financial stability). The financing maturity is
directly linked to the receivables due date. Moreover, short term trade receivables
financing techniques, like trade finance, are a flexible form of financing, since the
bank or the financial entity can refuse the purchase of new receivables on a
unilateral basis, preventing any spill-over effect in case of stress scenario. These
techniques, notably factoring1 and forfaiting should receive the same treatment as
trade finance for the Liquidity requirements. In addition, even if we welcome the
European Parliament improvement of the Trade Finance off-balance sheet
treatment in the NSFR, we believe that a 5% RSF should apply, regardless of the
maturity. (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
1 It is worth noting that for the NSFR, this is also recommended by the EBA in its December 2015ís NSFR report for factoring and forfaiting,
and that Delegated regulation 2015/61 (art. 33.3) explicitly mentions factoring as a business model that may be exempted from the inflow
cap, thus receiving preferential treatment.
4
                                                                                                                     www.ebf.eu

4.      Take full advantage of the EU Single Market and the Banking
        Union by:
    g) recognising the eurozone single constituency in the banksí systemic scoring
The cross-border activity indicator overstates the systemic importance of activities
within the Banking Union. Intra-eurozone banking activities (including the local
activities of subsidiaries and local central bank deposits) are accounted for in the
same way as cross-border activities conducted outside the eurozone. The lack of
recognition of the EU Single Market and of the Banking Union as prudential realities
for systemic risk purposes neglects the objectives of achieving a free flow of capital
and liquidity and dismisses the significant accomplishments made in the EU in
terms of the Single Rulebook, Single Supervision and Single Resolution. A more
adapted calculation which takes into account what has already been achieved in
the eurozone would free up capacities in banksí balance sheets, at a time where
European economic growth is gathering pace and needs financing. Cross-border
activities between SSM countries should be removed from the indicator (see
detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    h) supporting capital and liquidity waivers and make liquidity waivers at solo
        level automatic and not discretionary for NSFR purposes within the Banking
        Union
Waivers are an effective tool to remove the obstacles to the free flow of capital
and liquidity across Member States of the Single Market and the Banking Union.
Enabling the free flow of capital and liquidity across borders is critical and
fundamental for improving financial stability.
For NSFR purposes, the liquidity subgroup status should be automatically granted
for subsidiaries within the same Member State or different Member States of the
EU single market and Banking Union. Indeed, the double requirement, both at solo
and consolidated level, does not reflect the way liquidity is managed in most
centrally managed banking groups. This is all the more the case within the
eurozone as there are no restrictions on the movement of capital and payments
(see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    i) granting preferential treatment for intragroup transactions
The preferential treatment for intragroup transactions should be granted
automatically and not subject to supervisory discretion. The European Union is a
single market, in which the financial sector benefits from a common prudential
regulatory framework in all EU Member States. Furthermore, within the European
Union, the majority of Member States (Euro Area and other Member States opting
to participate) are also part of the Banking Union which provides a Single
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). Due to
these significant advances of the single market and single rulebook, banking
groups with an EU parent institution should be treated equally in the European
Union, especially in the Banking Union. Preferential intragroup treatment of NSFR
5
                                                                       www.ebf.eu

should be supported within the Single Market and Banking Union (see detailed
analysis and recommendations here).
5.      Finance the European economy and innovation by:
     j) maintaining and extending the SME Supporting Factor (SF)
Given the fact that SMEs carry a lower systematic risk than larger corporates,
capital requirements for SME exposures should be lower than those for large
corporates to ensure an optimal bank financing of SMEs. Currently, SME exposures
of up to EUR 1.5 million are subject to a 23.81% reduction in risk weighted
exposure amount. However, we would support any amendment aiming at raising
this threshold and extending the application of the supporting factor for exposure
amounts over the defined threshold (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
     k) supporting bank lending for infrastructure projects
We encourage the possibility to free up resources to support infrastructure
financing, crucial to revamp the economy. We deem however that the list of
eligibility criteria is too restrictive, thus limiting the qualifying projects. Therefore,
we support amendments aiming at maximizing the effectiveness of the supporting
factor (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
     l) supporting bank lending for sustainable finance
The EBF recognises the need for an energy transition and the decarbonisation of
banksí balance sheets. In connection with the current work on sustainable finance,
we understand that the best way to ensure the most accurate outcomes is to
follow a sequential approach: first regarding taxonomy and an appropriate
disclosure as it will clearly define what we understand as sustainable; and second,
evaluate the convenience to work on prudential requirements. We are supportive
of the proposal of the parliament with regards to the EBA tackling this work and
urge to improve the timeline (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
     m) Treatment of equity securities hedging derivatives in the Net Stable Funding
        Ratio:
Equity securities hedging derivatives receive a unjustified penalizing RSF
treatment that will impact ends-users capacity to hedge against risk. The inclusion
of a monitoring exercise on the appropriate treatment applied to securities
hedging derivatives (paragraphs 7a and 7b of article 510 (CRR)) in the Parliament
report is a first step in the right direction, but is not enough and should be
complemented during the trilogues by a lower calibration of the RSF for equity
derivatives held as hedges in specific situations (e.g. when the equity instrument
is liquid). This is necessary to avoid significant impacts on equity markets during
the period preceding the review clause. Consistent with Article 8 paragraph 5 LCR
DA, the NSFR should treat derivative hedges together with the liquid assets to be
hedged. (see detailed analysis and recommendations here) .
6
                                                                            www.ebf.eu

    n) exempting all export credit exposures from the Leverage Ratio
The EBF supports excluding ECA exposures by means of Article 114(2) in such a
way that not only exposures guaranteed in the currency of the specific Member
State in where the ECA is based would be excluded in case they comply with the
characteristics laid down in the article. However, we strive for the full exemption
of all OECD ECA exposures from the application of the leverage ratio, irrespective
of the rating of the country to which the ECA belongs and the currency of
denomination of the exposure. This approach is key for the successful continuation
of the export finance business (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    o) adjusting the risk weight exposure amount for investment in private equity
        in the form of units or shares in a Collective Investment Undertakings (CIU)
The private equity industry plays an important role in delivering smart, sustainable
and inclusive growth that creates jobs and enhances long-term competitiveness
of the European Union. However, this role partly depends on the relationship that
this industry has with the banking sector. We believe it is important to ensure that
the existing CRR rules do not disincentivise banksí investments into private equity
that provide financing to innovative and growing companies. The EBF therefore
supports a preferential regime to private equity exposures under both the
standardised and IRB approaches in the form of shares or units of a fund, provided
these meet certain conditions which we deem adjusted to the tasks Venture
Capital Funds do as investors in unlisted SMEs (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
    p) removing the deduction of software from banksí regulatory capital
The current regulatory capital framework for credit institutions does not recognise
the value of software for capital purposes, which is a significant disincentive for
investment in innovations. Indeed, banks contribute to the digitalisation of the EU
economy. They need to invest in software development to remain competitive and
to strengthen their cybersecurity. Emerging fintech players and non-EU banks (US
and Swiss at least) do not face the same heavy regulatory burden imposed on
the European banking sector. The EBF therefore supports an exemption for
software from the capital deduction to support business critical investments to be
made in IT structures and to further evolve within the digital era. The EBF
therefore supports the European Parliamentís amendment (see detailed
analysis and recommendations here).
    q) Maintaining consistency with prudential supervisory expectations
P2G is a supervisory expectation that has to be met at all times, and therefore, in
terms of the calculation of minority interest, P2G should have the same treatment
as P2R. In this sense, both components of Pillar 2 should be reflected in the surplus
capital calculation for the amount determining minority interests and be included
in the consolidated CET1 capital (see detailed analysis and recommendations
here).
7
                                                                       www.ebf.eu

6.      Making regulation and supervision fit for purpose and avoiding
        unnecessary burden for banks
    r) alleviating the administrative burden on small and non-complex institutions
We support the objective to allow small and non-complex institutions to benefit
from less stringent reporting and disclosure and remuneration requirements
insofar as the principle of ësame activities, same risks, same rulesí is applied.
Should the proportionality principle be extended to simplified requirements, the
minimum solvency and liquidity ratios should be appropriately calibrated to ensure
similar prudence, to maintain equality of treatment and not to jeopardise the
consumer protection and the level playing field. This will reduce administrative
costs in a proportionate manner for such institutions without watering down
prudential standards. Should a simplified NSFR be adopted small and non-complex
banks should have the choice to adopt it or the standard NSFR (see detailed
analysis and recommendations here).
    s) removing daily reporting requirement for NSFR in case of breach
The CRR2 working draft requires a daily NSFR reporting in case the NSFR might
fall below 100% (according to Article 428b (3) and 414). Taking into account the
principle of proportionality a daily reporting of the NSFR should be omitted. As the
NSFR is a structural liquidity ratio and its information is based on balance sheet
positions which are reported on a monthly basis, banks should not be required to
calculate balance sheet data on a daily basis. While the information gain is very
limited, the effort for this is excessive. (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
    t) keeping current simplified methods for counterparty credit risk
In our view the proposed simplified approaches to measure counterparty credit
risk are not necessary for smaller banks with small derivative business because
they will cause important implementation and calculation costs without delivering
significant added value for banks and supervisors. We therefore recommend
maintaining the simplified methods (Mark-to-Market and current Original
Exposure Method ñ OEM -) instead of the new simplified standardised approaches.
We also recommend to increase the thresholds, which would benefit smaller banks
and reduce complexity and regulatory burden for them (see detailed analysis
and recommendations here).
    u) keeping current well-functioning large exposure regime
The current calculation basis (i.e. under partial inclusion of Tier 2 capital) should
be maintained. The proposed restriction to Tier 1 in CRR II is too restrictive, as
this change alone posed considerable challenges to institutions in terms of their
large exposure limits and thus their ability to lend.
The application of credit risk mitigation techniques should be voluntary and the
value of the collateral should not be added to the institutionís exposure to the
collateral provider. (No mandatory substitution.) The mandatory use of collateral
8
                                                                       www.ebf.eu

for credit risk mitigation purposes poses major challenges to the institutions and
would have a large impact on repo and securities lending transactions. The
conclusion of such transactions would in future be much more difficult or even no
longer possible, because the daily monitoring of the large exposure limits of
collateral providers cannot be controlled by the institutions. This would have a
drastic impact on the banksí liquidity situation. The repo and securities lending
market is an important source of short-term funding for the banking industry.
It should be permissible to use the internal models method (IMM) not only in the
solvency regime but also for the purposes of the large exposures regime.
Especially since to US has finalised its version of the Large Exposure framework
(mid-June 2018) and allows US banks continue to use internal models to measure
the exposure to derivatives.
Harsher European limits should be avoided (see detailed analysis and
recommendations here).
    v) aligning remuneration policies and practices with effective risk management
The EBF advocates against setting a pay ratio as well as demanding a gender
neutral remuneration policy as these would be misplaced in the prudential risk
framework because they have no link with the objective of the CRD which is to
reinforce the alignment of the remuneration policies and practices with effective
risk management (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    w) aligning the IRRBB requirements with the Pillar II framework
The Pillar 2 assessment should remain an idiosyncratic process. It is not
appropriate to create technical standards to standardise Pillar 2 risk metrics
(notably Pillar 2 risks should be measured through net interest income). EBA
guidelines should not impair the flexibility of credit institutions and supervisors
(see detailed analysis and recommendations here)
    x) Maintaining transitional measures for the Danish compromise2
CRR Art. 49 (on Danish Compromise) itself does not refer to 31.12.2022. The
31.12.2022 deadline is in CRR Art 471 (transitional measure regarding the
deduction method), but that article is overruled by Article 16 in the ECB Regulation
2016/445 of 14/03/2016. The latter requires entities which have not received
permission to apply the Danish Compromise to deduct holdings in insurance
undertakings already as from 1-1-2019.
The EP amendment in CRR Art. 49 aims to avoid that this ECB provision enters
into force:
- until 31-12-2022, institutions are allowed not to deduct insurance undertakings
without prior permission of the ECB
2
  The Italian Banking Association does not agree with this position.
9
                                                                       www.ebf.eu

- after 31-12-2022, ECB may permit institutions not to deduct insurance
undertakings
However, the proposed EP adjustment triggers a concern for financial
conglomerates already benefiting from a permission. Following the EP proposal,
the competent authority would have to give a new permission to these
conglomerates to apply Danish Compromise after 31 December 2022. EBF objects
to this EP proposal and wants to keep Article 49(1) CRR unchanged (cf. Council
proposal)î (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
    y) Not imposing an unnecessary reporting burden for the Leverage ratio, by
       requiring a daily calculation
Such a requirement will have minimal added value but lead to heavy
administrative burden and very costly IT investments (in a context where the
priority is to invest in digital solutions) as the current practice in Europe is to
calculate the Leverage ratio on a quarter end position.
    z) Aligning and limiting public disclosure with agreed requirements
The disclosure of quantitative data in relation to the future Standardised
Measurement Approach in operational risk should be required only when SMA
enters into force (in the next CRR3-CRD6). Hence, we support Council proposal.
The review should refrain from anticipating proposals which are still being
considered by the Basel Committee such as the capital floors effect by risk type.
Also, the disclosure requirements arising from the Danish Compromise would
defeat the purpose of Article 49(1) of the CRR and the associated exemption
decisions made by competent authorities.
Finally, Pillar 2 Guidance disclosure should not be required, as proposed by
Parliament in Recital 11 (see detailed analysis and recommendations here).
10
                                                                      www.ebf.eu

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Market Risk
Issue/Refere  European Council        European Parliament         EBF Position                   EBF Recommendations
nce           Position                Position
FRTB ñ        FRTB-Reporting          FRTB capital requirement    The EBF supports Council       Support Council approach, but no front-running of the Basel timeline
Application / Requirements in 2020 or starting in 2022 without    approach, but rejects          (1.1.2022) for reporting requirements.
Transpositio  2021 before Baselís     FRTB adjustment that should reporting requirements
n calendar of deferred implementation be issued by the Basel      before Baselís timeline (no
the FRTB      and reporting date to 1 Committee by the end of     reporting before 1 January
-CRR Art. 3,  January 2022.           2018. No earlier reporting  2022).
101a, 325     No capital requirement. requirements.
and 501b-                                                         The Parliament approach
                                                                  would imply reporting and
                                                                  capital requirements based
                                                                  on outdated marked risk
                                                                  framework by 2022, without
                                                                  the latest international
                                                                  developments (FRTB 2.0). This
                                                                  capital requirement will apply
                                                                  for a short period, before a
                                                                  revised new requirements,
                                                                  including revised trading book
                                                                  definition, will be
                                                                  implemented into EU
                                                                  regulation following a new
                                                                  proposal from the
                                                                  Commission based on the
                                                                  capital requirement standard
                                                                  that will be issued by the end
                                                                  of 2018. The Parliament
                                                                  proposal is considered
                                                                  unworkable
                                                                                  11

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
FRTB -        Use of simplified         Added individual permission    Use of simplified approach:    At least: increase absolute threshold to EUR 500m, without individual
Art. 325a (1) approach (Art. 325a): 10  by the competent authority     EBF pleads for ìthe higher ofî permission by the competent authority
Application   % of total assets / EUR   to use simplified approach, if both thresholds to not
of simplified 500m (EU-COM: EUR         exposure size is between       exclude certain cases of
standardized  300m)                     EUR 300m and EUR 500m.         smaller banks from usage of
approach:                                                              simplified approach.
absolute
threshold
FRTB -        Analogue EU-COM (5 % /    Analogue EU-COM (5 % /         EBF pleads for threshold 10 %
Thresholds    EUR 50m)                  EUR 50m)                       balance sheet total / EUR
Ñsmallì                                                                150m
trading book
(Art. 94)
FRTB -        Removal of the            Technical amendments to        If we consider the ongoing     EBF Amendment:
Structural    Commission proposal to    the Commission proposal.       works led by the Basel         Delete Art. 325c and maintain Art. 352(2)
hedges of     replace article 352(2) by                                Committee on the structural
foreign       article 325c as regards                                  foreign exchange position, the
exchange      the ongoing work of the                                  EBF supports the removal of
risk          Basel Committee on this                                  Article 325c (CRR) from the
-CRR Art.     issue.                                                   draft regulation, as proposed
325c-                                                                  in the Council compromise
                                                                       text. Article 352(2) (CRR)
                                                                       should continue to apply and
                                                                       be completed by the
                                                                       conclusions of the discussion
                                                                       paper (EBA/DP/2017/01)
                                                                       published by EBA on June
                                                                       2017.
                                                                                       12

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
FRTB -        Withdrawal of the        Technical amendments to  If we consider the ongoing      If the Parliament report is adopted, the following typo should be
Inclusion in  modification proposed by the Commission proposal. works of the Basel Committee    modified in paragraph 4 of article 104 (CRR):
the trading   the Commission to                                 on boundary issues, the EBF     ì4. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, an institution may not assign a
book          Article 104 on the                                supports the removal of         position in an instrument referred to in points (e) to (i) (j) of paragraph 2
                                 -
              frontier between the                              Article 104 (CRR) from the      to the trading book where that institution is able to satisfy the
                                 C
              banking book and the                              draft regulation, as proposed   competent authorities that the position is not held with trading intend
              trading book.      R                              in the Council compromise       or does not hedge positions held with trading intend.î
                                 R                              text. Article 104 of Regulation
                                 A                              (EU) 575/2013 should
                                 r                              continue to apply.
                                 t                              Nevertheless, it should be
                                 .                              considered that paragraphs
                                 1                              (3)(d) and (10) of Article 104
                                 0                              (CRR) and Article 325k (CRR)
                                 4                              of the Commission proposal
                                 a                              are welcomed due to the
                                 n                              sensitivity of European banks
                                 d                              to such collective investment
                                 3                              undertaking (CIU) concerns.
                                 2                              Thus, we support the wording
                                 5                              provided in the Parliament
                                 k                              report, unless the Basel
                                 -                              Committee proposes more
                                                                flexible criteria in the final
                                                                standards.
FRTB -        Technical amendments     Technical amendments to  The EBF considers neither the   Nevertheless, if article 104b (CRR) is maintained in the final text, the 2
Requirement   to the Commission        the Commission proposal  Council compromise nor the      following adjustments should be considered as they are neither in the
s for trading proposal                                          Parliament report as            Council compromise text nor in the Parliament report:
desk                                                            satisfactory as regards         1)        To improve the organisation of desks dedicated to internal
-CRR Art.                                                       requirements for trading        hedges, paragraph 2(b) of article 104b should be modified as follows :
104b-                                                           desk. Indeed, as long as the    "(b) each trading desk shall have a clear organisational structure;
                                                                Basel Committee is still        positions in a given trading desk shall be managed by designated dealers
                                                                working on trading desk         within the institution; each dealer shall have dedicated functions in the
                                                                requirements, Article 104b      trading desk; one dealer shall be assigned to one trading desk only; one
                                                                                                dealer in each trading desk shall take a lead role in overseeing the
                                                                                13

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                          (CRR) should be removed         activities and the other dealers of the trading desk. This condition shall
                                                          from the legislative proposal.  not apply for the purpose of the trading desk referred to in point (a) of
                                                          Indeed, in its consultation     Article 106(5);
                                                          launched on March 2018 (i.e.    2)        Not to apply and to define inadequate ex-ante requirements to
                                                          BCBS d436), the Basel           desks dedicated to internal hedges and due to their activity on banking
                                                          Committee proposes some         book positions, paragraph 2(c) of article 104b should be modified as
                                                          refinements and recognizes      follows: "(c) position limits shall be set within each trading desk
                                                          that ìthe requirement for a     according to the business strategy of that trading desk. This condition
                                                          single head trader per desk     shall not apply for the purpose of the trading desk referred to in point
                                                          and the restriction that a      (a) of Article 106(5);î
                                                          trader may only be assigned
                                                          to a single trading desk ñ
                                                          could conflict with the way
                                                          banks organise their trading
                                                          desks.î (cf. paragraph 2.1.4).
FRTB -        Technical change to the No change to the    The EBF considers that IRT
Internal risk Commission proposal     Commission proposal trading desk should not be
transfer                                                  capitalized on a standalone
(IRT)                                                     basis under certain
-CRR Art.                                                 conditions. Indeed, to manage
106-                                                      their risks in a consistent
                                                          manner banks have usually
                                                          centralized the management
                                                          of their market risks in a
                                                          specialized subsidiary which is
                                                          capitalized on a standalone
                                                          basis. When the subsidiary
                                                          offers hedging services to its
                                                          customers, it is usual that the
                                                          interest rate risk hedges of
                                                          the Banking Book (IRRBB) of
                                                          all entities within the Group
                                                          are executed with a trading
                                                          desk solely dedicated to the
                                                          commercial hedging activity.
                                                                          14

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                            The mandate of this trading
                                            desk is to offset the market
                                            risk with third parties. We
                                            therefore believe that
                                            intragroup risk transfers
                                            should be allowed to be
                                            executed with a trading desk
                                            of a subsidiary or parent
                                            entity provided this trading
                                            desk is governed by strict
                                            requirements and a robust
                                            internal control framework.
                                            Besides, the positions related
                                            to IRRBB exposures should be
                                            attributed to a supervisory-
                                            approved internal risk
                                            transfer (IRT) desk which
                                            should hedge the positions by
                                            entering into other interest
                                            rate risk exposures:
                                            -       either directly with
                                            external third parties;
                                            -       or via other non-
                                            internal risk transfer trading
                                            desk which will in turn
                                            globally hedge these positions
                                            with the market.
                                            To ensure that the internal
                                            risk transfer desk
                                            appropriately offset market
                                            risks arising from banking
                                            book exposures, the
                                            institution should establish,
                                            policies, procedures, internal
                                                            15

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                 controls, analyses and
                                                                 independent reviews.
                                                                 We consider the new
                                                                 requirements defined in
                                                                 article 106 (CRR) should only
                                                                 apply after the transposition
                                                                 in Europe of the ongoing
                                                                 works of the Basel Committee
                                                                 on boundary issues: it should
                                                                 only apply to GIRR IRT traded
                                                                 after the application date of
                                                                 the new market risk
                                                                 requirements. We think that
                                                                 it is not possible to implement
                                                                 the new IRT requirements on
                                                                 existing interest rate risk
                                                                 hedges, which include both
                                                                 Banking Book and client
                                                                 hedges, by ìrebookingî the
                                                                 portion related to the hedges
                                                                 of the Banking Book.
                                                                 Therefore, we strongly
                                                                 advocate that the proposed
                                                                 requirements apply only to
                                                                 new interest rate risk internal
                                                                 hedges of the banking book.
                                                                 Article 106 should continue to
                                                                 apply as defined in Regulation
                                                                 (EU) 575/2013.
FRTB -        Removal of the            Technical changes to the To be consistent with the
Assessment    requirement to assess     Commission proposal      latest developments at the
of the        the modellability of risk                          Basel level, the EBF supports
modellability factors as regards the                             the Council compromise
of risk       latest Basel                                       proposal amending Article
factors       developments                                       325bf (CRR).
                                                                                 16

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
-CRR Art.
325bf-
FRTB -        No change to the    Earlier issuance of the EBA The EBF welcomes the
Calculation   Commission proposal report                      proposal of the Parliament
of stress                                                     report asking the EBA to
scenario risk                                                 submit the regulatory
measure                                                       technical standards defined in
-CRR Art.                                                     paragraph 4 of Article 325bl
325bl-                                                        (CRR), six months after the
                                                              entry into force of this
                                                              Regulation, as regards the
                                                              sensitivity of this standard. As
                                                              such, we are of the view that
                                                              the Councilís proposal
                                                              convergences to the one of
                                                              the Parliament.
FRTB -                                                        The EBF supports the
Disclosure of                                                 deletion, in the Council
risk weights                                                  compromise and in the
under the                                                     Parliament report of
standardised                                                  paragraph (i) of Article 438
approach                                                      (CRR).
and under
internal
models
-CRR Art.
438-
                                                                              17

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
 CCR:      Update of article 514 Update of article 514                                   updated counterparty credit risk framework, potential future
Review     (CRR) with the        (CRR) with the           We support the European       exposure (PFE) and.
clause     introduction of a     introduction of a review Parliament and the Council    We consider the amendment to Art. 514 proposed by the Council
-CRR Art.  review report.        report.                  proposal to amend Article     and by the Parliament should be revised as follows:ì1. The EBA
514-                                                      514 (CRR) in order to         shall... [four one years after entry into force of this Regulation],
                                                          confide to the EBA a report   report to the Commission on the impact, relative calibration and
                                                          evaluating the impact and     appropriateness of the methodologies of the approaches set out
                                                          the calibration of the CCR    in Part Three, Title II, Chapter 6, Sections 3 to 5, used to calculate
                                                          framework.                    the exposure value of derivative transactions, for the purpose of
                                                                                        the capital, the large exposure and the leverage ratios. The
                                                          Nevertheless, we consider     analysis shall take into account cross effects on the CVA Risk
                                                          the EBA report should be      Capital Charge.î
                                                          published earlier than 4
                                                          years after the entry into
                                                          force of CRR2. Additionally,
                                                          it is important that not only
                                                          the calibration but also the
                                                          methodology of the new
                                                          approaches itself is re-
                                                          evaluated. As a
                                                          consequence, the EBF asks
                                                          for an amendment to
                                                          Article 514(1) (CRR)
                                                          introduced by both the
                                                          Parliament report and the
                                                          Council compromise.
                                                          Moreover, the small
                                                          number of amendments
                                                          brought by the European
                                                          Parliament and by the
                                                          Council of the EU on the
                                                          Commission proposal leads
                                                                        18

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                            to the transposition in
                                            Europe of a revised
                                            framework, without any
                                            clear evaluation of the side
                                            effects of this measure. As
                                            a consequence, the
                                            impacts of the revised CCR
                                            framework on the credit
                                            valuation adjustment (CVA)
                                            capital requirements and
                                            on the leverage ratio has
                                            not been assessed and no
                                            update of the credit risk
                                            mitigation (CRM)
                                            framework has been
                                            considered.
                                            We hope that the future
                                            transposition in Europe of
                                            the agreement of the Basel
                                            Committee published on
                                            December 2017, with an
                                            updated framework for
                                            market risk capital
                                            requirement, will consider
                                            the cross effects of the CCR
                                            framework, the CVA
                                            framework and the FRTB
                                            framework before the
                                            introduction of any new
                                            capital requirement.
                                                          19

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                           Indeed, before the future
                                                           update of the banking
                                                           package, we fear
                                                           undesirable capital
                                                           requirement consequences
                                                           due to the application to
                                                           the CVA capital
                                                           requirement of the
                                                           exposure at default (EAD)
                                                           calculated with the new
                                                           CCR framework.
CRR:        Replacement of OEM    Replacement of OEM and   EBF agrees with EBA           Retain current OEM and MtM for smaller banks. (As the original
Requireme   and MtM with the      MtM with the much more   (November 2016 report) to     EBF recommendation is most likely not going to be followed)
nts for     much more complex     complex revised OEM and  maintain the current OEM      Choose the proposal of the EP and the Council.
application revised OEM and the   the Simplified SA-CCR,   and the MtM for banks
of the      Simplified SA-CCR,    respectively. Thresholds with low derivatives
Simplified  respectively.         regarding derivative     activity. The EP/Council
Methods ñ   Thresholds regarding  business:                thresholds are still not in
CRR Art.    derivative business:      - SSA-CCR: 10%       line with the original EBF
273             - SSA-CCR: 10%            total assets and position:
                     total assets         300 million           - SSA-CCR: 10% or
                     and 300          - Rev. OEM: 5% and             150 million
                     million              100 million           - Rev. OEM: 10% or
                - Rev. OEM: 5%                                       150 million
                     and 100                               However, some parts even
                     million                               less strict than according to
                                                           the EBF proposal and the
                                                           EP/ Council proposal is
                                                           definitely favourable
                                                           compared to the COM
                                                           version (SSA-CCR: 10% and
                                                                          20

     Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                              150 million; Rev. OEM: 5%
                                                              and 20 million)
CCR: Scope Derivative transactions Derivative transactions in It would be helpful to make Choose the proposal of the EP and the Council.
of the OEM in all asset classes    all asset classes          the (rev) OEM applicable to
ñ CRR Art                                                     all kinds of derivatives
282                                                           transactions compared to
                                                              only IR, FX and Gold
                                                              contracts as according to
                                                              COM proposal.
                                                                            21

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Liquidity Risk ñ NSFR
Issue/Refer European Council European Parliament           EBF Position                 EBF Recommendations
ence        Position         Position
NSFR -      No mention       The EBF welcomes the          The NSFR penalises           We support the Parliament text to avoid asymmetric treatment:
Asymmetri                    proposals of the              matched book                 0% RSF for short term HQLA1 reverse repos with financial counterparties, at
c treatment                  Parliament report on          transactions, since the      least with regulated financials, including CCPs, PSEs, MDBs and NDBs.
of                           articles 428r and 428s        negative impact of the
repos/rever                  (CRR) to apply a              reverse repo leg more than
se Repos                     symmetrical treatment on      offsets the positive impact
-CRR Art.                    level 1 assets that have a    of the repo leg. Notably,
428r, 428s                   residual maturity of less     the asymmetrical
& 510(6) &                   than six months and           treatment of repos (0%
510(7)-                      resulting from secured        ASF) and reverse repos (5-
                             lending transactions and      10% RSF) risks reducing
HIGH                         capital market-driven         market liquidity and
PRIORITY                     transactions. It is essential disincentives banks to
                             not to destabilize            provide liquidity to the
                             European capital market       financial market due a
                             making activities (and        lowering of supply,
                             therefore European            reduced volumes and
                             market liquidity) with the    increased prices for these
                             introduction of the NSFR.     transactions.
                             The amendments
                             proposed by the European      Applying an asymmetrical
                             Parliament on Article 510     treatment to short-term
                             (CRR) are interesting         repo and reverse repo
                             considering they delete       transactions on HQLA 1
                             any automatic revision of     collateral in the NSFR
                             the required stable           restricts a bankís treasury
                             funding (RSF)                 to steer its liquidity
                             requirements. The EBF         position and limits the flow
                             supports the amendments       of cash and securities
                             proposed by the European      around the financial
                             Parliament on paragraphs      system. Any asymmetrical
                                                                                22

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                             6 and 7 of article 510        treatment between repos
                             (CRR) (the Council            and reverse repos, which
                             mentions a possible fall      are essential instruments
                             back to BCBS rules).          for market making
                                                           activities, would be
                                                           detrimental to market
                                                           liquidity, while market
                                                           liquidity is the
                                                           fundamental assumption
                                                           of the LCR, and to the price
                                                           of securities.
                                                           EBF recommends adopting
                                                           a consistent treatment for
                                                           Level 1 asset (essentially
                                                           government bonds) be
                                                           they owned by the bank,
                                                           which are allocated a 0%
                                                           RSF, or be they obtained
                                                           from reverse repo.
NSFR -                       The     inclusion    of     a A two years delay between    We support the application of the 5% RSF for margined derivatives in line with
Stable                       monitoring          exercise  NSFR effective application   the recent revised Basel rules (cf. CRR2 Article 428s).
funding for                  leading to an EBA report      date and start of the
gross                        and        a       potential  studies on a potential       We would hence support a removal of the two years delay (CRR Article 510(4)
derivative                   Commission        legislative reassessment of the          and (5)). As soon as Basel would finalize and adjust its position on this point
liabilities &                proposal        on        the regulation would lead to a   (as previously done on add-on), EU should be able to adjust without any
dedicated                    appropriate       treatment   straightforward              delay.
treatment                    applied     to     securities contraction of derivatives
for                          hedging derivatives, as       markets and, as a            Moreover, it should be considered that in its ìFrequently asked questions on
securities                   defined in paragraphs 7a      consequence of the           market risk capital requirementsî issued on March 2018 (BCBS d437, paragraph
hedging                      and 7b of article 510 (CRR)   capacity of end-users to     ë1.10 - Default riskí, Question 3), the Basel Committee underlines the link
derivatives-                 of the Parliament report is   hedge of their risks.        between the hedging instrument and the underlying equity instrument. This
CRR Art.                     a very interesting issue                                   already constitutes a first step at Basel Level in the acknowledgment of the
                             supported by the EBF.
                                                                               23

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
510(7a) &                                                                                                 rationale of securities hedging derivatives packages overall specific treatment
510(7b)-                                                                                                  (CRR Article 510(7a) and (7b)).
                                                                                                          Consistent with Article 8 paragraph 5 LCR DA, the NSFR should treat derivative
                                                                                                          hedges together with the liquid assets to be hedged.
HIGH
PRIORITY
NSFR -         "DEFINITIONS         AND     ìDEFINITIONS            AND      a) We regret the lack of     a) We urge the European co-legislator to apply a 5% required stable funding
Trade          LIQUIDITY                    LIQUDITY                         consideration of this issue. factor to all trade finance off-balance sheet commitments regardless of their
finance and    REQUIREMENTS".               REQUIREMENTSî.                   The initial required stable  residual maturity (CRR Article 428s).
similar        (103) Article 411 is         (103) Article 411 is             funding requirements
products       replaced       by      the   replaced by the following:       defined by the Commission    The Parliament position on trade finance should be supported in principle
(factoring)    following:                   "Article 411                     do not reflect any           noting that further changes still need to be considered on the NSFR proposals
- -CRR Art.    "Article 411                 Definitions                      international standard, as   to ensure an international level-playing field.
428s, 428ta    Definitions                  For the purposes of this         the Basel Committee has
& 428u-        For the purposes of          Part,     the      following     not calibrated specific      b) We fully agree with the Parliamentís position in which Factoring receives the
               this Part, the following     definitions shall apply:         factors for trade finance    same treatment as trade finance for the liquidity requirements defined in Part
HIGH           definitions shall apply:     (15a) ëfactoringí means          off-balance sheet            VI of Regulation 575/2013 (CRR Article 411(15a)). It is worth noting that it was
PRIORITY                                    a contractual agreement          operations. The EBA report   also recommended by the EBA in its December 2015ís NSFR report, recognizing
                                            between       a     business     on the NSFR, published on    that ìa low RSF requirement could be justified by the low liquidity risk given
                                            (assignor) and a financial       December 2015 (i.e. EBA      that inflows and outflows for trade finance are typically matched, small in
                                            entity (factor) in which the     Opinion EBA/Op/2015/22),     value, short in duration, and have an identifiable source of repayment 3î.
                                            assignor assigns or sells its    proposed the application     Factoring, from the perspective of liquidity inflows and outflows and asset-
                                            receivables to the factor in     of maturity based RSF        liability management, shares most of the peculiar features of trade finance
                                            exchange of providing the        Factors for off-balance      and therefore, similarly, a consistent treatment would be justified.
                                            assignor with one or more        sheet trade finance          We recommend this alignment to be made for all the short-term trade
                                            of the following services        commitments.                 receivables financing techniques, including forfaiting.
                                            with regard to the               However, trade finance off-
                                            receivables assigned:            balance sheet related
                                            (a)     advance      of     a    products should not be
                                            percentage of the amount         more detrimentally treated
      3 EBA Report on Net Stable Funding Requirements under Article 510 of the CRR, page 115 https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/983359/EBA-Op-2015-
      22+NSFR+Report.pdf
                                                                                                 24

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                      of receivables assigned,    than committed facilities
                      generally short term,       for which a 5% RSF applies
                      uncommitted and without     whatever the maturity is.
                      automatic roll-over,
                      (b)             receivables b) Like trade finance,
                      management, collection      factoring is a major
                      and credit protection       instrument       for    the
                      whereby in general, the     financing of European
                      factor administers the      enterprises. Factoring in
                      assignorís sales ledger and Europe represents around
                      collects the receivables in 60% of global turnover,
                      its own name.               thatís around Ä1.6 trillion
                      For the purposes of Part    euros,     or   10.5%     of
                      VI, factoring shall be      European GDP (source:
                      treated as trade finance.". EUF). Almost Ä220Bn of
                                                  funding is supporting over
                                                  200,000            European
                                                  businesses, 87% of which
                                                  are SMEs. A Study Group
                                                  established      by     the
                                                  Committee on the Global
                                                  Financial System affirms
                                                  that factoring supports the
                                                  firmsí ability to extend
                                                  trade credit to their
                                                  customers, recognizing that
                                                  it is as important as trade
                                                  finance. Factoring, as well
                                                  as all the short term trade
                                                  receivables techniques, are
                                                  short term uncommitted
                                                  financing, with a low
                                                  funding risk profile.
                                                                      25

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
NSFR ñ     The EBF welcomes the refinements brought by the         We welcome the revision of   Consider supporting Parliament text.
Covered    Parliament report and by the Council compromise on      the definition of non-
bonds ñ    covered bond. Indeed, covered bond activity is a        mandatory over-
-CRR Art.  European specificity and needs some refinements         collateralisation in
411 &      when transposing in Europe any international            paragraph 6 of article 411
428af-     standard.                                               (CRR) and strongly support
                                                                   the Parliament additional
                                                                   deletion of the reference of
                                                                   ìmarket discipline
                                                                   reasonsî. The Parliament
                                                                   wording is consistent and
                                                                   operationally aligned with
                                                                   market practices.
                                                                   Moreover, the application
                                                                   in article 428af (CRR) of an
                                                                   85% required stable
                                                                   funding requirement to
                                                                   assets encumbered for a
                                                                   maturity of one year or
                                                                   more in a cover pool
                                                                   funded by covered bonds,
                                                                   is a balanced measure.
Simplified Article 428b              Article 428b                                               Should a simplified NSFR be agreed it is of great importance that in CRR it
methods    The net stable funding    The net stable funding ratio                               remains an option for each single bank to consider, with no influence of
for NSFR   ratio                     1.        The detailed net                                 Member states or National Competent authorities to dictate the choice.
           1.        The detailed    stable funding requirement                                 Therefore, EBF supports the Parliament amendment that entails the sentence
HIGH       net stable funding        laid down in Article 413(1)                                ìSmall and non-complex institutions may choose to calculate the ratio between
PRIORITY   requirement laid down     shall be equal to the ratio                                an institution's available stable funding as referred to in Chapter 4a of this Title,
           in Article 413(1) shall   of an institution's available                              and the institution's required stable funding as referred to in Chapter 4b of this
           be equal to the ratio of  stable funding as referred                                 Title, over a one-year period and expressed as a percentage.î
           an institution's          to in Chapter 3 of this Title
           available stable funding  to the institution's required
           as referred to in         stable funding as referred
           Chapter 3 of this Title   to in Chapter 4 of this Title
                                                                                        26

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                  to the institution's        over a one year period and
                  required stable funding     shall be expressed as a
                  as referred to in           percentage.
                  Chapter 4 of this Title     Small and non-complex
                  over a one year period      institutions may choose to
                  and shall be expressed      calculate       the     ratio
                  as a percentage.            between an institution's
                  Institutions shall          available stable funding as
                  calculate their net         referred to in Chapter 4a of
                  stable funding ratio in     this     Title,   and     the
                  accordance with the         institution's       required
                  following formula:          stable funding as referred
                                              to in Chapter 4b of this
                                              Title, over a one year
                                              period and expressed as a
                                              percentage.
                                              Institutions shall calculate
                                              their net stable funding
                                              ratio in accordance with
                                              the following formula:
NSFR-                                                                       In      the       explanatory The EBF proposes the following amendment of article 411(2) of the Commission
Definition-                                                                 memorandum          of    the proposal: ì(2) 'retail deposits' means a liability to a natural person or to a small
Retail                                                                      revised            Delegated  or medium-sized enterprise ('SME'), where the SME would qualify for the retail
deposits                                                                    Regulation on the Liquidity   exposure class under the standardised or IRB approaches for credit risk, or a
-CRR Art.                                                                   Coverage Ratio4 (adopted      liability to a company which is eligible for the treatment set out in Article 153(4),
411-                                                                        by the Commission on July     and where the aggregate deposits by that SME or company all such enterprises
                                                                            13th, 2018), it is stated the on a group basis on the basis of a group of connected clients as defined in point
                                                                            following: ´ As a result of   (39) of Article 4(1) do not exceed EUR 1 million; ëRetail Depositsí include notes,
                                                                            the feedbacks received,       bonds and other debt securities issued by the credit institution, when at least
                                                                            some proposed changes         one of the following situation apply to those bankís liabilities:
                                                                            were removed to revert to
                                                                            the existing provisions of         a) liability is sold exclusively in the retail market and held in a retail
                                                                            the      LCR       Delegated             account;
                                                                            Regulation. One such case
       4 Please see : http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/3/2018/EN/C-2018-4404-F1-EN-MAIN-PART-1.PDF
                                                                                                 27

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                          is the definition of retail     liability is held in a dossier linked to a retail account of the issuer institution and
                                          deposits for which a major      it is possible to monitor the effective holder of the instrument.î
                                          part of comments received
                                          criticised the introduction of
                                          the concept of ìconnected       .
                                          clientsî as not being
                                          adequate from a liquidity
                                          risk perspective and very
                                          challenging to implement
                                          due in particular to data
                                          availability. This definition
                                          was then removed from the
                                          text not to duplicate the
                                          definitions of the CRR. ª
                                          The EBF welcomes the fact
                                          that       the      European
                                          Commission agreed on the
                                          inappropriateness of the
                                          concept of íconnected
                                          clientsí     for      liquidity
                                          purposes,      and      as    a
                                          consequence decided to
                                          revert to the existing
                                          provisions of the LCR
                                          Delegated Regulation.
                                          However, this reversion is
                                          formalized by the deletion
                                          of Article 3(8) (ëretail
                                          depositsí) of the LCR
                                          Delegated Act (2015/61)
                                          and by a link to CRR
                                          definitions. However, article
                                          411(2) (CRR) of Commission
                                          proposal      includes     the
                                                               28

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                concept of ëconnected
                                                clientsí in the definition of
                                                ëretail deposits.
                                                In order to faithfully
                                                transpose       what      we
                                                understand to be the
                                                Commission decision, the
                                                EBF strongly recommends
                                                leaving      the      current
                                                Regulation (EU) 575/2013
                                                unchanged regarding the
                                                basis for examining the
                                                aggregate deposits of SME.
                                                The last part of the
                                                amendment (starting with
                                                Retail Depositsí include
                                                notes, bonds and other debt
                                                securities) was in the EBF
                                                Risk Reduction Container 3
                                                July 2017 and in the EP/Econ
                                                document and we ask to see
                                                it confirmed in CRR2.
Treatment                                       A comparison of the           In our view, this breaks with the otherwise entirely consistent classification of
of deposits                                     requirements for classifying  deposits and assignment of corresponding outflow rates and stable funding
by non-                                         customer deposits for the     factors. First, the stable funding factor is only 50% instead of 60% to reflect the
financial                                       purpose of determining        40% outflow rate under the Delegated Regulation on the LCR. Second, the single
customers,                                      outflow rates in accordance   50% factor puts liabilities covered by a deposit guarantee scheme at an
sovereigns,                                     with the Delegated            economically inexplicable disadvantage given that they are likely to be more
central                                         Regulation on the liquidity   stable than those not protected by a deposit guarantee scheme. Protected
banks,                                          coverage ratio (LCR) and      deposits should be assigned a stable funding factor of 80%, in our view, to
multilateral                                    the corresponding criteria    correspond with the 20% outflow rate in the LCR Delegated Regulation. This
developme                                       in the current CRR2           distinction is justified since there is no risk of losing the deposits and thus no
nt banks,                                       proposal for determining
                                                                    29

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
public-                                          stable funding factors         significant economic incentive for depositors to withdraw these funds on a large
sector                                           shows that the two are         scale, even beyond the 30-day horizon specified in the Delegated Regulation.
entities in                                      generally consistent. Take
the NSFR -                                       retail deposits, for instance.
Article                                          The Delegated Regulation
428l(b)                                          assigns these an outflow
CRR2                                             rate of 5% (for deposits
                                                 with residual maturities of
                                                 30 days or less) while CRR2
                                                 proposes a stable funding
                                                 factor of 95% (for deposits
                                                 with residual maturities of
                                                 less than one year).
                                                 The exception to this
                                                 consistency is the
                                                 treatment proposed in
                                                 Article 428l(b) for deposits
                                                 by non-financial customers,
                                                 sovereigns, central banks,
                                                 multilateral development
                                                 banks, public-sector
                                                 entities, credit unions
                                                 authorised by a competent
                                                 authority, personal
                                                 investment companies and
                                                 clients which are deposit
                                                 brokers. Article 28 of the
                                                 LCR Delegated Regulation
                                                 assigns an outflow rate of
                                                 40% to deposits by this
                                                 category of clients with a
                                                 residual maturity of less
                                                 than 30 days if the deposits
                                                 are not covered by a
                                                 national deposit guarantee
                                                                      30

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                scheme. If the deposits are
                                                covered by a deposit
                                                guarantee scheme, the
                                                outflow rate is halved to
                                                20%.
                                                The proposal for CRR2, by
                                                contrast, does not mirror
                                                this distinction when
                                                assigning a stable funding
                                                factor. As a result, all the
                                                above deposits with
                                                residual maturities of less
                                                than one year ñ regardless
                                                of whether or not they are
                                                covered by a national
                                                deposit protection scheme
                                                ñ receive a stable funding
                                                factor of 50% (instead of an
                                                analogous 60% and 80%).
NSFR ñ     The EBF welcomes the                                              Consider supporting the Council text on this issue.
Disclosure refinements provided
-CRR Art.  by the Council
447 &      compromise on
451a-      information that should
           be disclosed by credit
           institutions on liquidity
           requirements and on
           the disclosure of key
           metrics, as defined in
           articles 447 and 451a
           (CRR).
                                                                     31

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Remove     The CRR working draft requires a daily NSFR reporting As the NSFR is a structural    We advise that the reference to article 414 in 428b (3) should be removed.
daily      in case the NSFR might fall below 100% (according     liquidity ratio, its
reporting  article 428b (3) and 414).                            information is based on
requiremen                                                       balance sheet positions
t for NSFR                                                       which are reported on a
                                                                 monthly basis, banks would
HIGH                                                             be required to calculate
PRIORITY                                                         balance sheet data not only
                                                                 per month-end but on a
                                                                 daily basis. Such an
                                                                 implementation would
                                                                 require significant IT efforts
                                                                 for banks and the resulting
                                                                 information wouldn¥t be
                                                                 relevant. Additionally, for
                                                                 short-term steering
                                                                 measures the LCR has been
                                                                 designed and already has to
                                                                 be reported on a daily
                                                                 basis.
                                                                 Since the LCR includes all
                                                                 positions with maturities up
                                                                 to 30 days, it reflects also
                                                                 all potentially volatile NSFR
                                                                 positions. Positions above
                                                                 30 days can naturally not
                                                                 expire within one month,
                                                                 and therefore the NSFR will
                                                                 not deteriorate excessively.
                                                                 NSFR effects from these
                                                                 positions longer than 30
                                                                 days are limited to roll
                                                                 down effects and the
                                                                 resulting lower ASF
                                                                 weights.
                                                                                      32

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Interest Rate Risk
Issue/Refer   European Council         European Parliament       EBF Position                EBF Recommendations
ence          Position                 Position
IRRBB ñ      The EBF considers      EBF believes the Parliament  It is crucial to avoid any Consider supporting the Council text.
Pilar 2R     the amendments of      report allows the ECB to     ambiguity as for
automatic    the Council            require a capital add-on     automaticity (the EBF is   We reject any link between a standardized measure and
ity ñ        compromise on          based on these two measures  in favour of total         supervisory measures. Standardized measures like the outlier
-CRD Art.    paragraph 5 of article only (although the SOTs on                              test cannot accurately reflect interest rate risk. They should
                                                                 suppression of
98(5) &      98 (CRD) as the best   the EVE and the NII are                                 continue to serve merely as an indicator to assist supervisors in
                                                                 automaticity).
104a∞(2)-    acceptable wording     supposed to be warning                                  the identification of institutions with an increased IRRBB. No
             since they clearly     indicators with no automatic                            automatism between supervisory indicators and capital
             waive the automatic    supervisory action).                                    requirements.
             capital requirement
             in case of a breach in
             the SOT or NII
             thresholds. Also, the
             Council compromise
             on paragraph 2 of
             Article 104a (CRD) is
             better formulated as
             regards to IRRBB
             P2R.
Art. 98      EBA mandate            EBA mandate for              The BCBS does not          Consider supporting the Council compromise.
(5a)(c)      deleted, NII           modelling and                set a second
CRD          outlier test           parametric assumptions       outlier test. We           The BCBS does not set a second outlier test. We reject the
             established in the     for NII and a NII outlier    reject the proposal        proposal to introduce a second outlier test proposed by the
Additional   legislative text.      test.                        to introduce a second      Parliament report. A second indicator would not enhance clarity
outlier test EBA should only                                     outlier test (i.e. as      on the riskiness of the institutions business. Economic value and
             set the details for                                 defined in the             net interest income indicators may result in divergent indication.
             the test.                                           Parliament report). A
                                                                 second indicator
                                                                 would not enhance
                                                                 clarity on the
                                                                 riskiness of the
                                                                                    33

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                institutions business.
                                                                Economic value and
                                                                net interest income
                                                                indicators may result
                                                                in divergent
                                                                indication.
IRRBB -    The EBF considers the                                It is crucial to exclude     Consider supporting the Council text.
         M amendments of the                                    behavioural assumptions
odelling   Council compromise                                   from these common            We have fundamental concerns regarding excessive
and        on paragraph (5a) of                                 parameters (CRD article      standardization as they might contradict the functioning of
parametric article 98 (CRD) as                                  98, paragraph 5a(b)) since   pillar 2 (individual methods). According to BCBS just a minimum
assumptio  the best acceptable                                  they depend on various       of standardization is required. If standardization was retained,
ns within  wording to define the                                heterogeneous factors        we would plead for a close involvement of the industry in case
the EBA    mandate delivered to                                 across jurisdictions (nature of developing the standards.
mandate ñ  the EBA on common                                    of retail products, client
-CRD Art.  modelling and                                        groups, local regulation,
98(5a)(b)- parametric                                           business environment,
           assumptions.                                         etc.).
IRRBB ñ                          The EBF considers the          If need be, it is important  Consider supporting the Parliament text, but advocate for replacing the wording
Requireme                        balanced approach of the       that the competent           'non satisfactory' by 'deficient', to be fully in line with the Basel Standards on
nt for a                         Parliament report on           authority justifies its      IRRBB.
standardis                       paragraph 3 of Article 84      requirement to use the
ed                               (CRD) as an acceptable         standardised                 We find it important that less complex institutions should be stressed by
methodolo                        proposal for the evaluation of methodology.                 adequately simplified version of a stress test and the methodologies reflects
gy ñ                             internal systems:                                           differences in size, complexity and business models. If the existing stress test
-CRD Art.                                                                                    setup clearly covers the major risks no amendments should be required.
84(3)-
                                                                                             The wording 'not satisfactory' should be replaced by the word 'deficient', as the
                                                                                             wording 'not satisfactory' leaves more discretionary room for interpretation than
                                                                                             the word 'deficient'. Moreover, the probability that an IMS is deemed 'not
                                                                                             satisfactory' is higher than the probability that an IMS is deemed deficient and
                                                                                             deficient is also the wording that is used in the Basel Standards on IRRBB
                                                                                      34

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
IRRBB ñ    Paragraph (g)                                          We prefer to support the Council text with one exception. The addition of article
Disclosure within the Council                                     448 (1)(g) should not be supported as this is proprietary information. "g)
ñ          compromise should                                               average and longest repricing maturity assigned to non-maturity
-CRR Art.  be deleted since it                                    deposits." This is in line with the EBFís view to support for the Council text
448-                                                              regarding CRD article 98 (5a).
           refers to
           behavioural models                                     The text under CRR Article 448(e)(ii) needs to be amended both in the
           that are not                                           Parliament and the Council version as it is currently referencing six supervisory
           comparable across                                      shocks for EVE as well as NII. This needs to be amended to two supervisory shock
           jurisdictions (cf.                                     scenarios for NII.
           point ii on
           modelling and
           parametric
           assumptions).
                                                          35

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Pillar 2 ñ Supervisory Review
Issue/Refer    European Council          European Parliament          EBF Position                  EBF Recommendations
ence           Position                  Position
Pilar 2 -     Both the Council and the Parliament have introduced     Such benchmarks are            The EBF supports Article 97(4a) (CRD) of the Council compromise and the
Supervisory   a new paragraph given the possibility for competent     considered as dangerous by     Parliament report only if the reference to benchmarks is removed.
review and    authorities to adapt the SREP methodology that may      the EBF because they could
evaluation    include ìbenchmarksî.                                   lead to potential problems
ñ                                                                     of interpretation.
- CRD Art.
97-
Pillar 2                                  We support the EP                                          Consider supporting the Parliament text.
Guidance ñ                                proposal to introduce a
CRD Recital                               new recital aimed at
9-                                        clarifying that Pillar 2
                                          measures should not
                                          conflict with the specific
                                          treatments set out in CRR,
                                          including those aimed at
                                          avoiding         unintended
                                          impacts on end-users and
                                          on the European economy
Pilar 2 -                                 The EBF rejects the new     The BCBS issued on 27          The EBF asks for the removal of Article 98(3a) (CRD) of the Parliament report
Technical                                 Article 98(3a) (CRD) of the October 2017 guidelines on
criteria for                              Parliament report which     the ìIdentification and
the                                       gives a too broad           management of step-in
supervisory                               definition of shadow        riskî. European legislators
review and                                banking entities/activities should therefore leverage
evaluation                                and requires to apply       on this international
ñ                                         individual limits to        consensus to further
-CRD Art.                                 exposures to such entities  elaborate on its European
98-                                       given that the Large        framework in order to
                                          exposure framework is       ensure level playing field on
                                          sufficient by itself.       that topic.
                                                                                          36

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Pilar 2 -  Both the Council and the Parliament have introduced      The EBF does not support      The EBF urges the trilogue partners to amend both Articles 104a(2)(a) and 2(b))
Additional two new paragraphs aiming to precise that Pillar 2       such approach that gives the  (CRD) of the Council compromise as well as the Parliament report as follows:
own funds  requirements (P2R) have to cover risks that are not      National Competent
requiremen covered or insufficiently covered by Pillar 1            Authority the possibility to  Council compromise - the following amendment should be inserted at the end
t          requirements.                                            use P2R to override           of paragraph 2(b): ìAdditional own fund requirements to cover the above
-CRD Art.                                                           transitional or               mentioned risks should not be in conflict with specific treatment set out in
104a-                                                               grandfathering                Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.ì
                                                                    arrangements, but also Pillar
                                                                    1 exemptions and exposures
                                                                    subject to a 0% risk weight   Parliament report - The following sentence should be modified as such: ìFor
                                                                    under the Pillar 1            the purposes of the first subparagraph, the capital considered adequate shall
                                                                    framework.                    cover all material risks or elements of such risks covered or not adequately
                                                                                                  covered by the own funds requirement. This may include risks or elements of
                                                                                                  risks that are explicitly excluded from the own funds requirements set out in
                                                                                                  Parts Three, Four, Five and Seven of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.î
                                                                                                  Parliament report - The following amendment should be inserted in the
                                                                                                  following way: Competent authorities shall assess the risks, to which the
                                                                                                  institution is exposed, taking into account the specific risk profile of each
                                                                                                  individual institution. Risks or elements of risks referred to in paragraph 1a
                                                                                                  shall not include risks for which this Directive or Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
                                                                                                  provide a transitional treatment, or risks which are subject to grandfathering
                                                                                                  provisions. Additional own fund requirements to cover the above mentioned
                                                                                                  risks should not be in conflict with specific treatment set out in Regulation
                                                                                                  (EU) No 575/2013.
Pilar 2 -  The EBF supports Article     Regarding the rationale of  To conclude on the scope of   Nevertheless, the EBF would like to amend the paragraph 1a of Article 104b in
Guidance   104b(3) and Article          the Pillar 2 guidance (P2G) P2G, the EBF would like to    the following way to better circumscribe the definition of P2G:
on         104b(4) (CRD) of the         described in Article        emphasise on the fact that    ìPursuant to the strategies and processes referred to in Article 73 and after
additional Council compromise.          104b(1a) (CRD), the EBF     P2G should cover risks that   consulting the competent authority, institutions shall establish an adequate
own funds                               supports the wording of     are not covered by P2R in     level of own funds that the competent authority is satisfied by and is
-CRD Art.                               the Parliament report.      order to take into account    sufficiently above the requirements set out in Parts Three, Four, Five and
104b-                                                               forward looking situations    Seven of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and in this Directive, including the
                                                                    as the stress test scenarios. additional own funds requirements imposed by the competent authorities in
                                                                    In addition, P2G should not   accordance with Article 104(1)(a) and Article 128, including to ensure so that
                                                                    cover macro-prudential risks  the institutionís own funds can absorb potential losses identified pursuant to
                                                                                        37

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                          that are already covered by   the supervisory stress test referred to in Article 100 without breaching either,
                                          others macro-prudential       :
                                          tools.                        (a)      a minimum fixed level of own funds set by competent authorities,
                                                                        where competent authorities may take into account credible management
                                          Last but not least, regarding actions and dynamic adjustments to the balance sheet that may take place
                                          the mandatory disclosure of   over the projection horizon; or
                                          P2G, the EBF supports         ¶ the own funds requirements set out in Parts Three, Four, Five and Seven of
                                          Recital 11 (CRD) of the EU    Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and the additional own funds requirements
                                          Commission proposal and       imposed by the competent authorities in accordance with Article 104(1)(a),
                                          the Parliament report         where competent authorities shall take into account credible management
                                          because the wording           actions and dynamic adjustments to the balance sheet that may take place
                                          inserted in the Council       over the projection horizon.î
                                          compromise is less clear.
                                                              38

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Leverage Ratio
Issue/Refere  European Council             European Parliament             EBF Position                   EBF Recommendations
nce           Position                     Position
Leverage      Article      429a(1)(f)(ii) Article 429a(1)(f)(ii) Exclusion The EBF supports the           We support a full exemption of all EU & OECD ECA exposures from the
Ratio and     Exclusion of guaranteed     of guaranteed parts of the       achieved CRR Leverage Ratio    application of the leverage ratio, irrespective of the rating of the
export credit parts of the exposures      exposures arising from export    compromise, understanding      country to which the ECA belongs and the currency of denomination
exposures     arising from export         credits from the scope of        that the inclusion of the      of the exposure, thus not bound by the credit risk steps as laid down
              credits from the scope of   leverage applies when a 0%       possibility of ECA exposures   in article 114(2).
              leverage applies when a     risk weight applies to the       to be ruled out by means of
              0% risk weight applies to   guaranteed part of the           Article 114(2) amends the
              the guaranteed part of      exposure. This was previously    original Commission proposal
              the exposure. This was      restricted to instances where    in such a way that not only
              previously restricted to    there was a 0% risk weight       exposures guaranteed in the
              instances where there       and the loan was funded in       currency of the specific
              was a 0% risk weight and    the local currency of the        Member State in where the
              the loan was funded in      country of the ECA. [Article     ECA is based would be
              the local currency of the   114(2)]                          excluded in case they comply
              country of the ECA.                                          with the characteristics laid
              [Article 114(2)]            However, there is still a level  down in the article.
                                          playing field issue with
              However, there is still a   regards       to        currency
              level playing field issue   exemptions based on article      We support the Parliament
              with regards to currency    114(2), as many countries        position which includes the
              exemptions based on         would only be fully exempted     expanded       exclusion   of
              article 114(2), as many     from exposures in their local    guaranteed        parts    of
              countries would only be     currency: not all EU Member      exposures arising from export
              fully exempted from         states use the euro as their     credits from the scope of
              exposures in their local    currency (while more than 0%     leverage ratio when a 0% risk
              currency: not all EU        of export credit exposures are   weight applies to the
              Member states use the       denominated in dollars) so       guaranteed part of the
              euro as their currency      they would not be exempted       exposure as per the Councilís
              (while more than 0% of      from intra-EU & OECD             text, but also expands the
              export credit exposures     exposures.                       exclusion of guarantees to all
              are denominated in
                                                                                         39

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
     dollars) so they would                  eligible unfunded         credit
     not be exempted from                    protection providers.
     intra-EU    &    OECD
     exposures.                              However, we strive for the full
                                             exemption of all OECD ECA
                                             exposures        from        the
                                             application of the leverage
                                             ratio, so our main concern
                                             with the current state of the
                                             amendments         after     the
                                             inclusion of article 114(2), is
                                             that the weight attributed to
                                             ECA-covered exposures for
                                             the purpose of leverage ratio
                                             calculation     would       vary
                                             depending on the affected
                                             ECA and sovereign credit
                                             rating. This would prove to be
                                             a real challenge for both ECAs
                                             and Banks business in the EU,
                                             as the lack of a level playing
                                             field within EU countries
                                             would                  generate
                                             disadvantages for exporters
                                             from different EU countries
                                             when pitching on the same
                                             transaction denominated in
                                             US Dollars.
                                             Banksí internal models would
                                             also have to be adapted to
                                             change the valuation of the
                                             leverage ratio of the exposure
                                             in function of the currency of
                                             the transaction and the rating
                                             of the country where the ECA
                                             is located, thus providing a
                                                           40

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                          drop of predictability in case
                                                                          of rating changes. With each
                                                                          rating change of a certain
                                                                          country,         the      weight
                                                                          attributed       to     exposure
                                                                          backed by the ECA of that
                                                                          country would be instantly
                                                                          affected,             potentially
                                                                          determining extra costs for a
                                                                          core business that would
                                                                          bring many benefits to the
                                                                          real economy.
Leverage      The Council proposal        The European Parliament         It is essential that EU rules are For all those reasons, the EBF would propose the following changes on
ratio - G-SII goes in the right           proposal can be read as the     aligned with the Basel III        Article 92(1)(da) based on Council proposal: ìIn addition to the
additional    direction, but the words    final requirement for G-SIIs to standards, i.e. 3% minimum        requirement set out in point (d) of Article 92(1), a G-SII, on a
leverage      ëmaintainí and ëbuffer      be sum of the 3% minimum        requirements + leverage           consolidated basis, shall maintain have a leverage ratio buffer
buffer        requirementí can be         requirement plus the G-SII      buffer calculated as 50% of a     requirement equal to 50% of the G-SII buffer as defined in point (3) of
-CRR Art. 92- read as the G-SII           requirement set as RWA          G-SIIís higher-loss absorbency    Article 128 of Directive 2013/36/EU. A G-SII shall meet the leverage
              leverage buffer to be       based 50% G-SII buffer:         risk-weighted requirements. It    ratio buffer requirement with Tier 1 capital only.î
              maintained even post        ì(d)     a leverage ratio of    is key to clarify that the G-SII
              stress:                     3%;                             additional leverage surcharge
              ì(d) a leverage ratio of    (da)     by derogation from     will be a buffer and not a
              3%.".                       point (d), each G-SII shall add requirement; indeed, this
              (a)(bis) the following      50% of the G-SII buffer         clarification will enable that
              new paragraph 1a is         calculated in accordance with   the requirement post stress
              inserted after paragraph    Article 131(4) of Directive     exercises will be at 3%, as it is
              1:                          2013/36/EU to the 3%            the case in the United States.
              " 1a. In addition to the    leverage requirement.î          In addition, it should consist
              requirement set out in                                      of Tier 1 capital, and also be
              point (d) of Article 92(1),                                 applied at consolidated level
              a G-SII shall maintain a                                    only.
              leverage ratio buffer
              requirement equal to
              50% of the G-SII buffer
              as defined in point (3) of
              Article 128 of Directive
                                                                                          41

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
              2013/36/EU. A G-SII shall
              meet the leverage ratio
              buffer requirement with
              Tier 1 capital only.î
Leverage      The EBF supports Article  The Parliament report                                          The EBF supports Article 429(3) (CRR) of the Council compromise.
ratio -       429(3) (CRR) of the       introduces an additional
Nature of the Council compromise        constraint by imposing at
numerator     which proposes the        least 50% of CET1 capital in
-CRR Art.     numerator as Tier 1.      the numerator of the leverage
429-                                    ratio, which is not consistent
                                        with the Basel III final
                                        standards.
Leverage                                The EBF welcomes the            We support the EP proposal     Consider supporting the European Parliament text.
ratio -                                 introduction of the new         to allow the exclusion of the
Exposures                               paragraphs 4a to 4d in Article  central bank deposits from
excluded                                429 (CRR) of the Parliament     the exposure measure,
from the                                report given the possibility to though we believe this
exposure                                exclude from the leverage       should not be limited to in
measure                                 exposure measure exposures      ëexceptional circumstancesí.
-CRR Art.                               to central banks under certain
429-                                    conditions.                     Nevertheless, the conditions
                                                                        laid down in paragraphs 4b
                                                                        and 4c of the Parliament text
                                                                        are so constraining that such
                                                                        exemption could be
                                                                        inapplicable. To that end, the
                                                                        EBF would like to ease the
                                                                        conditions of exemption,
                                                                        highlighting on the huge
                                                                        impact for the credit
                                                                        institutions and the financing
                                                                        of the real economy.
                                                                                      42

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                 Should the conditions of
                                                                 exemption not be eased, the
                                                                 EBF would appreciate to have
                                                                 further explanations as
                                                                 regards the content of
                                                                 paragraph 4d for the purpose
                                                                 of the operational
                                                                 implementation.
Leverage     The EBF fully supports                                                            Support the Council text for the introductory part of Article 429a(1).
ratio -      Article 429a(1)
Exposures    introductory part of the
excluded     Council compromise
from the     because it extends the
exposure     scope of exclusion
measure      contrary to the
-CRR Art.    proposals made by the
429-(1)      Commission and the
             Parliament.
Leverage      Regarding Article       The EBF fully supports the This Council and Commission   Consider supporting the Parliament text.
ratio -      429b(5), the Commission  amendment introduces in    texts raises concerns because
Calculation  legislative proposal and Article 429b(5) of the     the settlement through Target
of the       the Council compromise   Parliament report (ìor     2 Securities (T2S) would not
exposure     have both retained the   settlement systems using a benefit from balance sheet
value of     notion of ìsettlement    common settlement          netting as T2S does not
assets / SFT systemî which differs    infrastructureî).          qualify as a ìsystemî.
settlement   from the current
system issue wording of the CRR
ñ            (ìsettlement
-CRR Art.    mechanismî).
429b-
                                                                                43

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Leverage    Regarding Article 429c(5) proposed by the               This, means that any        The EBF would like to remove the application of the alpha
ratio -     Commission, the Council and the Parliament, the         review of the SA-CCR        factor to the replacement cost in Article 429c(1) of the Council
Calculation value of the multiplier is set at 1.                    methodology could not       compromise and the Parliament report in order to have a
of the                                                              impact the exposure         consistent approach to on-balance components with other
exposure                                                            measure calculation in the  exposure types and not to be inconsistent with a non-risk
value of                                                            leverage ratio.             balance sheet driven exposure amount.
derivatives
-CRR Art.
429c-
Leverage                                The EU Parliament has       The EP proposed             Reject the EP proposal.
ratio -                                 introduced a new Article    requirement will lead to
Disclosure                              429ga related to the        heavy administrative
and                                     calculation method of the   burden, as the current
reporting                               leverage exposure for the   practice in Europe is to
of the                                  purposes of reporting and   calculate the Leverage
leverage                                disclosure for large        ratio on a quarter-end
ratio                                   institutions as an average  position. In addition, this
-CRR 429ga                              of daily positions (except  change will lead to a
& 451-                                  for derivatives, SFTs add-  disadvantage for European
                                        on and sales awaiting       banks that permitted them
HIGH                                    settlement to be taken      to remain so far
PRIORITY                                into account a month-end    competitive vis a vis US
                                        basis).                     competitors. Indeed, even
                                                                    if US banks are required to
                                        In addition the EBF rejects calculate their exposure as
                                        the new paragraph 2a        an average of daily
                                        introduced by the           positions (except for off
                                        Parliament in Article 451.  balance sheet, derivatives
                                        On the one hand, should     PFE, SFTs add-on), EU
                                        credit institutions be      credit institutions have on
                                        required to disclosure      their side to comply with
                                        their leverage ratio with   solo requirements
                                        and without exposures to    contrary to their US peers
                                                                                 44

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                       central banks, they would   and do not benefit from
                                       lose the benefit of such an public and private
                                       exemption because the       securitisations to downsize
                                       disclosure would remain     their balance sheet.
                                       the new market reference.   Consequently, the EBF
                                       On the other hand, the      rejects Article 429ga of the
                                       information related to      Parliament report.
                                       amount of assets used in
                                       central bank facilities is
                                       sensitive and may be
                                       viewed as confidential.
Leverage      The EBF fully supports   EP proposes January 2020    Council proposal would be    Support the Council proposal.
ratio - Entry Article 3 of the Council                             in line with date of
                                                                   application for
into force    compromise because                                   modifications of the LR-
and date of   it does not require an                               exposure, new calculation
application   entry into force of the                              methods for derivatives
ñ             3% leverage ratio from                               etc.
-CRR Art. 3-  1 January 2019 (but
              two years after date of
              entry into force) and
              because it aligns the
              G-SII leverage ratio
              buffer application date
              with BCBS (from 1
              January 2022).
                                                                                45

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Large Exposures
Issue/Refere European Council Position      European Parliament        EBF Position                   EBF Recommendations
nce                                         Position
Large        The amendments to paragraph 4 art 390 introduced by      When calculating an exposure   To ensure that the EU is not put at a competitive disadvantage to the
exposure -   the Parliament report and the Council compromise should  there should be as far as      US, the EBF would like to amend the proposal paragraph 4 of article 390
Calculation  be clarified since they specify the calculation of SFTsí possible consistency between   of the Parliament report and the Council compromise in the following
of           exposures in an article dedicated to derivatives.        capital and large exposure     way:
derivativesí                                                          regime. The IMM is permitted   ìBy derogation from the first sub-paragraph, institutions with a
exposure                                                              for some products for the      permission to use the methods referred to in Part Three, Title II,
value ñ                                                               purpose of risk weighted       Chapter 4, Section 4, and Chapter 6, Section 6, may use these methods
-CRR Art.                                                             assets. In that context        for calculating the exposure value for derivatives and securities
390-                                                                  comprehensive approval         financing transactionsî.
                                                                      process takes place. Insofar
                                                                      the IMM should be applicable
                                                                      for the purpose of calculating
                                                                      exposures in the large
                                                                      exposure regime.
                                                                      Moreover, the US finalised
                                                                      their version of the Large
                                                                      Exposure framework in June
                                                                      2018. In the final US rule
                                                                      (called Single Counterparty
                                                                      Credit Limit) US banks can
                                                                      continue to use internal
                                                                      models to measure the
                                                                      exposure to derivatives. The
                                                                      standardized approach (SA-
                                                                      CCR) will not be mandatory
                                                                      (Rules text:
                                                                      https://www.federalrese
                                                                      rve.gov/newsevents/pre
                                                                      ssreleases/files/bcreg20
                                                                      180614a1.pdf).
                                                                                     46

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Large                                                                     Institution should be allowed    EBF support the amendment to paragraph 2 art 401 introduced by both
exposure -                                                                to use own estimates of the      the Parliament report and the Council compromise.
Calculating                                                               effects of financial collateral
the effect of                                                             in relation to Securities
the use of                                                                Financing Transactions, to
credit risk                                                               stay consistent with the
mitigation                                                                treatment allowed in credit
techniques ñ                                                              risk.
-CRR Art.
401-
Large         The EBF supports the proposals of European Parliament       Besides that, applying the       The EBF would like to amend the article 403 of the Parliament report
exposure -    and the Council compromise with regard to exposures in      mandatory substitution           and the Council compromise in the following way: ìWhere an exposure
Substitution  the form of a guarantee for officially supported export     approach would ignore the        to a client is guaranteed by a third party or secured by collateral issued
approach ñ    credit and exposures in the form of a collateral or a       principle introduced by the      by a third party, an institution shall may:î
-CRR Art. 400 guarantee for residential loans.                            Basel Committee with the
& 403-                                                                    Basel II comprehensive           We also ask for an alteration from shall to may in Art. 401 (4).
              However, the EBF is of the view that an ìexemptionî is      approach for the usage of
              more appropriate than a ìderogationî. Therefore, the EBF    financial collateral where it is 401 (4): ìWhere an institution reduces an exposure to a client due to an
              supports the Council proposal to amend art 400(2) by        recognised as credit risk        eligible credit risk mitigation technique in accordance with Article
              introducing paragraphs (k) and (l). Nevertheless, since the mitigant, not because of the     399(1), it may shall, in the manner set out in Article 403 (inserted by
              Council defines precise and objective criteria, those       credit quality of the issuer but EP/Council), treat the part of the exposure by which the exposure to the
              paragraphs should be moved to art 400(1).                   because of the liquidity of the  client has been reduced as having been incurred to the protection
                                                                          financial instrument.            provider rather than to the client."
                                                                          The concept behind the
                                                                          substitution approach is to
                                                                          assimilate a financial
                                                                          collateral to an unfunded
                                                                          credit protection provided by
                                                                          the issuer, which does not
                                                                          reflect the reality of the risk
                                                                          taken by the institution (in
                                                                          case of default of the
                                                                          counterparty, the bank
                                                                          liquidates the collateral but
                                                                          will not keep the collateral,
                                                                                         47

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                          expecting its repayment by
                                                                          the issuer at maturity).
                                                                          Moreover, the substitution
                                                                          approach will raise
                                                                          operational issues for tri-party
                                                                          repo where the identification
                                                                          of the issuer is problematic.
Large        The EBF welcomes the proposals of European Parliament        However, a legislative change    The EBF therefore recommends that the discretion set out in Article
exposure -   and the Council compromise to include ìthe qualifying        is required to remove the        400(2)(c) of the CRR be moved to Article 400 (1) as (m)new so that,
Exclusion of holdingsî in the scope of intragroup transactions and        conflicting powers afforded to   where a firmís intragroup counterparty is subject to the same
intragroup   holdings under art 400.                                      Member States and                conditions as those listed above (i.e. equivalent prudential
transactions                                                              Competent Authorities, as        requirements, included in the same consolidation with the same levels
ñ                                                                         well as to enhance the ability   of risk and control and with no impediments to the transfer of funds),
-CRR Art.                                                                 of the SSM to exercise its       intragroup exposures must be fully and consistently excluded from large
400-                                                                      powers as the common             exposure limits.
                                                                          supervisory authority of the
                                                                          Banking Union.                   Exemption in Article 400 (1) (f) should also be granted to exposures to
                                                                                                           counterparties that are eligible for the purpose of Article 113(6) in every
                                                                                                           respect, except for point d) (i.e. counterparty located in the same
                                                                                                           Member State as the institution).
Large        The Commission proposal        In the Parliament text the    The mandate to EBA might be      The EBF strongly supports the Parliament text.
exposures ñ  mandates the EBA to            mandate is limited to the     read as a premise for a future
exemptions ñ monitor the use of             exemptions set out in Article removal or limitation of the
CRR Art. 507 exemptions from the large      390 (6).                      exemptions identified.
HIGH         exposures limits, set out in                                 Putting into question the
PRIORITY     Article 390 (6), 400 (1) and                                 sovereign exemption from the
             400(2), and to report to                                     large exposures limits would
             the Commission about the                                     deeply impact both banks and
             impact of their possible                                     the markets of government
             removal or restriction.                                      debt instruments, and should
             The exemptions set out in                                    therefore be avoided.
             Article 400 (1) and 400 (2)
             include, among others,
             sovereign exposures.
             The Council confirms this
             mandate.
                                                                                         48

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Pillar 3 - Disclosure
Issue/Refere   European Council            European Parliament        EBF Position                    EBF Recommendations
nce            Position                    Position
IFRS16 -       The EBF is disappointed that no proposal has been made Indeed, this accounting         Amendments in the CRR proposal would enable an adequate
Prudential     by the EU Council and the EU Parliament to take into   standard introduces             treatment of leases for own funds requirements, leverage ratio and
impacts -      account the entry into force of IFRS16 from 1 January  fundamental changes in          NSFR.
               2019.                                                  accounting for operating
                                                                      lease contracts on lessee`s
                                                                      balance sheet as it no longer
                                                                      differentiates between
                                                                      operating and finance lease
                                                                      and requires to recognise all
                                                                      on-balance as Right of Use
                                                                      Assets.
Pilar 3 &      As regards paragraph (b)                               Considering the ongoing         Concerning the application of capital floors described in paragraph (d)
Disclosure -   of Article 438 related to                              discussion of the Basel         of Article 438, the EBF rejects all the proposals made by the EU
Disclosure of  the composition of the                                 Committee on the Output         Commission, the EU Council and the EU Parliament.
own funds      capital based on SREP                                  floor, it is obvious that the
requirements   outcomes, the EBF                                      CRR-CRD IV review should         Regarding the disclosure requirements arising from the Danish
and risk       supports the proposal                                  restrain from anticipating      Compromise, the EBF rejects all the proposals made by the EU
weighted       inserted in the Council                                proposals which are still being Commission, the EU Council and the EU Parliament in paragraph (f) of
exposure       compromise.                                            considered by the Basel         Article 438.
amounts ñ                                                             Committee. In addition, the
-CRR Art.                                                             proposal may oblige banks to    EBF welcomes the removal of paragraph (i) of Article 438 proposed by
438-                                                                  explain the way the output      the EU Council and the EU Parliament related to hypothetical risk-
                                                                      floor will apply and constitute weighted exposure amounts.
                                                                      an obstacle against internal
                                                                      models.
                                                                      The disclosure requirements
                                                                      which are being proposed in
                                                                      relation to holdings in
                                                                      insurance undertakings would
                                                                      defeat the purpose of Article
                                                                                      49

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                 49(1) of the CRR and the
                                                                 associated exemption
                                                                 decisions made by competent
                                                                 authorities.
Pilar 3 &     The EBF supports Article                                                       Support Council proposal
Disclosure -  446 of the Council
Disclosure of compromise because
operational   the disclosure
risk          requirement of
managemen     quantitative data in
tñ            relation to the future
-CRR Art.     Standardised
446-          Measurement Approach
              in operational risk has
              been removed.
Disclosure on The Council report is     The Parliament report    The EBF proposes to align   The EBF proposes the following adjustment to Article 3(2) (CRR):
a             aligned with the          propose to postpone the  disclosure requirements             ì2. This Regulation shall apply from [two years after date
consolidated  Commission proposal       requirement to 1 January for own funds and eligible          of entry into force], with the following exceptions:
basis and     (i.e. entry into force in 2020                     liabilities with TLAC               (a) the provisions on the introduction of the new
TLAC          2019)
                                                                 requirements and to                 requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities in points
-CRR art.
3(2), 13,
                                                                 postpone disclosure                 (4)(b), (7), (8) to (9), and (12) to (38) and (40), which shall
434a and                                                         requirements defined in             apply from 1 January 2019;
437a-                                                            article 13 (CRR) after the          (aa) the provisions on the introduction of disclosure
                                                                 definition of standardized          requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities in
                                                                 disclosure requirements             Article 437a, which shall apply from 1 January 2019;î
                                                                 (please see the mandate
                                                                 confided to EBA in Article
                                                                 434a (CRR)).
                                                                                50

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Non performing loans
Issue/Refere European Council  European Parliament             EBF Position                    EBF Recommendations
nce          Position          Position
Massive                       Article 4 - paragraph 1          We support the position of the  Article 4 - paragraph 1
disposals ñ                   point 144 h (new)                Parliament which allows         point 144 h (new)
CRR Art 144                   (144h) ìmassive disposalsî       institutions to adjust their    (144h) ìmassive disposalsî in respect to article 181 means disposals
h (new)                       means the ones implemented       credit risk parameters (LGD     implemented by institutions in the context of a multi-year program
                              by institutions in the context   estimates) by disregarding      which aim to materially reduce the amount of defaulted exposures in
                              of a multi-year program which    totally or partially the losses their balance sheets and which has been previously notified by
                              aim to materially reduce the     due to massive NPLs disposals.  institutions to their competent authority. They shall cover at least 15%
                              amount         of      defaulted                                 of all observed defaults in the sense of Article 181(1)(a) during the
                              exposures in their balance       It is important not to          program implementation period. Circumstances in which a bank
                              sheets and which has been        underestimate the range of      implements a massive disposal include material changes (also related
                              previously       notified     by potential massive disposal      to banking sector consolidation processes) in its credit/business
                              institutions to their competent  that might be of interest of    strategies or in its monitoring/recovery strategies.
                              authority. They shall cover at   many banks. In order to clarify
                              least 15% of all observed        the perimeter of massive
                              defaults in the sense of Article disposals, a compromise text
                              181(1)(a) during the program     is proposed in the next
                              implementation period.î.         column.
                                                                             51

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Treatment of Software
Issue/Refere European Council  European Parliament             EBF Position                      EBF Recommendations
nce          Position          Position
Remove the   NA               The EU Parliament position       The digital reality, the new      The EBF fully supports an amendment to CRR to exempt
deduction of                  refers to the prudential         competitive       environment,    software from being deducted from CET1 (SW should be risk
software                      treatment of software which      the cyber security threats and    weighted at 100%). In this sense, the EBF supports the EP
from banksí                   should be supported.             the        new       regulatory   amendment amending article 36.
regulatory                    The amendment proposes to        framework entail indeed an
capital -CRR                  exempt software from being       increase         of      banksí
Art 36 and                    deducted from CET1which          investments in software.          Consequently the Article 134 of the current CRR (other items)
134                           should be fully supported.                                         should be amended in order to be aligned with the EP
                              However, it also proposes        The European application of amendment to article 36:
HIGH                          that EBA develops, within 6      the Basel III standards implies
PRIORITY                      months, draft regulatory         that software investments      1. ìTangible assets within the meaning of item 10 under the heading
                              technical standards to specify   should be fully deducted from     'Assets' in Article 4 of Directive 86/635/EEC and the software that
                              the term ësoftwareí and the      bankís        CET1      creates   shall not be deducted in accordance with article 36(1)(b) shall be
                              circumstances where a non-       competitive disadvantages         assigned a risk weight of 100 %.î
                              deduction of software from       and an uneven playing field to
                              CET1 items would be justified    the detriment of European
                              from a prudential perspective    banks which have to deduct
                              taking into account:             their whole investments in
                              i) the evolution of the banking  software        compare       to
                              sector in an even more digital   emerging          technological
                              environment         and      the players and banks from other
                              opportunities and threats        jurisdictions, such as US
                              which banks are facing in the    institutions where software is
                              era of digitalisation;           not considered as an
                              ii)      the       international intangible asset.
                              differences in the regulatory    Software         characteristics
                              treatment of investments in      justify a prudential treatment
                              software where software is       not fully deducted from CET1
                              not deducted from capital        but risk weighted like other
                              (e.g. treated as tangible asset) assets.     Altogether,     the
                              as well as the different         removal of capital deduction
                                                                              52

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                       prudential rules that apply to would result in a framework
                       banks       and      insurance where banks, instead of
                       companies and                  deducting      from    capital
                       iii) the diversity of the      upfront 100% of their
                       financial sector in the Union  software investments, would
                       including       non-regulated  deduct them progressively
                       entities such as FinTechs;     following the depreciation
                                                      profile, with an additional
                                                      capital charge based on a
                                                      100% RW which would add
                                                      some conservatism. This
                                                      adjustment would promote
                                                      the digital transformation of
                                                      the banking sector, aligning
                                                      the     rules    with   other
                                                      technological             and
                                                      international players.
                                                                    53

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Making regulation and supervision fit for purpose and avoiding unnecessary burden for banks.
Issue/Refere  European Council European Parliament  EBF Position                EBF Recommendations
nce           Position         Position
P2G should                                           P2G is a supervisory       Insertion of two new paragraphs: The excess capital should be
have the                                            expectation that must be    calculated on the basis of the regulatory and supervisory
same                                                met at all time, and        requirements and any supervisory expectation independent on
treatment as                                        therefore, in terms of the
                                                    calculation of minority
                                                                                the form itís required (formal requirement, informal
P2R in terms
                                                    interest, P2G should have   requirement, guideline...). Also ICAAP and stress test exercises
of the
calculation                                         the same treatment as       form part of the supervisory expectations and they should be
of minority                                         P2R. In this sense, we      considered in the excess capital calculation.
                                                    propose that both
interest
                                                    components of Pillar 2
(articles 84,
                                                    should be reflected in the
85 and 87                                           surplus capital calculation
CRR).                                               for the amount of
                                                    determining minority
                                                    interests to be included
                                                    in the consolidated CET1
                                                    capital.
                                                                 54

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Capital instruments
Issue/Refere  European Council Position   European Parliament     EBF Position                      EBF Recommendations
nce                                       Position
Allow         Recognition of issuances  Recognition of issuances  the requirement for IHC to be     Support parliament and Council proposals. Both the Parliament
qualifying as through holdings in third through holdings in third subject to ìthe same rulesî as    and the Council text reflect well our concerns and the
consolidated  countries.                countries.                credit institutions stablished in
                                                                                                    amendments we worked on.
own funds                                                         the proposal1 might lead to
minority                                                          interpretation difficulties.
interests and                                                     Added to that, it seems difficult
AT1 and T2                                                        that all rules applying to credit
issued by                                                         institutions match exactly with
                                                                  those applicable for holding
subsidiaries
                                                                  companies. In order to avoid a
established
                                                                  miss-interpretation of the
as
                                                                  proposal, we believe art. 81
Intermediat                                                       and 82 could be rephrased so
e Holding                                                         as to make reference to
Companies                                                         ìprudential requirements as
(IHCs) in                                                         stringent as those applied to
third                                                             credit institutions in that third
countries                                                         countryî instead of ìthe same
                                                                  rulesî.
                                                                                  55

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Remuneration
Issue/Refere  European Council Position        European Parliament           EBF Position                      EBF Recommendations
nce                                            Position
Staff         The rules as currently drafted affect digital specialists who In      the      new      digital By way of solution, it would be appropriate to exclude digital
Remuneratio   do not perform risk taking (including operational risk)       environment, it is necessary to   transformation profiles from the application of the remuneration
n caps in the activities but are critical for the digital transformation of ensure a level playing field      requirements.
context of    banks. In particular digital specialists could qualify as     between players where they
the digital   ìidentified staffî due to being in charge of ìsignificant     perform the same activities,
banking       business unitsî in accordance with the Delegated              but non-bank entities are not
              Regulation on identification of staff.                        subject to the CRR/ CRD IV.
                                                                            Digitally skilled employees are
Proposal for                                                                scarce and constitute an
a NEW                                                                       essential part of business
ARTICLE                                                                     strategy         for      digital
                                                                            transformation. The dynamics
                                                                            on         the        innovative
                                                                            environment are driven by
                                                                            entrepreneurship.         These
                                                                            entrepreneurs are typically
                                                                            the owners of their companies
                                                                            so their remuneration is
                                                                            equity based. In case a bank
                                                                            needs to attract them, they
                                                                            need       to     change     the
                                                                            remuneration profile in a
                                                                            radical manner that is not
                                                                            adjusted to the Fintech
                                                                            environment. This is acting as
                                                                            a barrier for them to join a
                                                                            banking entity compared to
                                                                            other type of environment.
                                                                            The      existing     regulatory
                                                                            requirements                  on
                                                                            remuneration           (deferral,
                                                                                            56

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                           payment in instruments, cap
                                                                           on the ratio of Variable/Fixed
                                                                           compensation) will hamper
                                                                           the banksí ability to attract
                                                                           digital talent from the non-
                                                                           banking marketplace which is
                                                                           not subject to the same
                                                                           requirements. This will act as a
                                                                           competitive disadvantage for
                                                                           banks.
Aligning       The exclusion criteria        The exclusion criteria        We agree with the wording        It would be advisable to leave some discretion to the national competent
remuneratio    proposed         by      the  proposed by the EP state      proposed by the EP since it      authority which might review the national exemption threshold upwards
n policies     Commission state the          the following:                excludes from the calculation    (or downwards, for some countries) if considered appropriate in that
and practices  following :                   ìan institution on an         of assets any assets held        particular market.
with           ìan institution that is not a individual basis, which may   entities that are regulated
effective risk large institution as defined  also be subject to prudential under AIFMD/UCITS or any         Regarding the individual threshold for disapplying the remuneration
managemen      in point (1) of Article 430a  consolidation or part of a    specific sectoral regulation     requirements to low remuneration, we believe lowering the thresholds
t              of Regulation (EU) No         banking group, the value of   (Solvency II) and that are part  and creating a threshold based on a percentage of the variable on the
               575/2013 and the value of     the assets of which is on     of the same group as an          total annual remuneration would add an important administrative
               the assets of which is on     average equal to or less      institution.    Moreover, we     burden and additional costs, disproportionate to the expected
               average and on an             than EUR 8 billion over the   believe that putting in place an improvement of risk management.
               individual     or,     where  four-year period              absolute exemption threshold     We consider that the level of the absolute threshold proposed by the
               applicable,        on       a immediately preceding the     for entities across the EEA at   Commission of Ä50.000 is low compared to current applicable levels in
               consolidated basis in         current financial yearî.      5bn does not take into           many Member States including key countries for the European financial
               accordance with this                                        account the specificities of     sector - such as UK, France and Luxembourg for example where the
               Directive and Regulation                                    each countryís market and we     level is around Ä100.000. Considering the great disparities of cost of
               (EU) No 575/2013 equal to                                   agree with the amount            living between countries and compensation practices, a low threshold
               or less than EUR 5 billion                                  proposed by the EP (i.e. Ä8bn    would impact even more employees in a country were level of
               over the four-year period                                   on an individual basis).         compensation are high. It would be appropriate, similarly to the entity
               immediately preceding the                                                                    threshold above, to leave some discretion to the national competent
               current financial year;î It                                                                  authorities which might review the threshold upwards if relevant for a
               would be appropriate to                                                                      specific market.
               exclude      the     entities
               subject      to      sectoral
               regulations out of the
                                                                                          57

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
              scope of CRD, if they are
              part of a banking group.
Gender        Council of the EU proposes  In art. 92 (2)                   It has no link with the        The EBF supports Article 92 (CRD) of the EU Commission proposal.
neutral       to completely amend the     (ba)       in paragraph 2, the   objective of the CRD which is  Indeed, in the Parliament report, EBF does not support the gender-
remuneratio   current formulation of the  following point is inserted:     to reinforce the alignment of  neutral policy which has nothing to do with prudential requirements and
n policy -CRD article to a supporting     ì(aa) the remuneration           the remuneration policies and  should not be treated in the CRD. In addition, the EBF does not support
Art. 92-      factor that is not bound by policy is gender neutral:        practices with effective risk  the Council proposal to add paragraph 3 on categories of staff whose
              any specific number, as the female and male workers          management. Given the fact     professional activities have a material impact on the institutionís risk
              calculation would be        will be equally remunerated      that SMEs carry a lower        profile, because the EC delegated regulation 604/2014 already defines
              adjusted to the different   for equal work or work of        systematic risk than larger    precisely the criteria for the identification of these categories of staff and
              exposures.                  equal value.î                    corporates,            capital this inclusion will only lead to additional confusion and complexity in the
                                          (bb)       The following         requirements      for     SME  definition of staff subject to the remuneration requirements.
                                          paragraph is inserted:           exposures should be lower      Cancel all provisions about gender in CRR and CRD. We support
                                          ì(2a) Paragraph 2 of this        than     those    for    large maintaining the current formulation of the text with the extension to
                                          Article and Articles 94 and 95   corporates to ensure an        EUR 3,000,000 in the formula as proposed in the EP version.
                                          shall be without prejudice to    optimal bank financing of
                                          the      full    exercise     of SMEs. We support the EP
                                          fundamental               rights amendment which raises the
                                          guaranteed by Article 153(5)     threshold to EUR 3,000,000.
                                          TFEU, general principles of
                                          national contract and labour
                                          law, Union and national law
                                          regarding        shareholdersí
                                          rights and involvement and
                                          the general responsibilities
                                          of the management bodies
                                          of the institution concerned,
                                          and the rights, where
                                          applicable, of the social
                                          partners to conclude and
                                          enforce              collective
                                                                                         58

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                           agreements, in accordance
                                           with national law and
                                           customs.î          European
                                           Parliament proposes to
                                           calculate Risk weighted
                                           exposures to SMEs with a
                                           formula that expands the
                                           Commission           original
                                           proposal      from       EUR
                                           1,500,000 to 3,000,000
Derogation    b)        a staff member     (b) a staff member whose         We support Council proposal but increasing the floor from 50k to 100k
from          whose annual variable        annual variable                  euros.
remuneratio   remuneration does not        remuneration does not
n rules of    exceed EUR 50.000 and        exceed EUR 50.000 and
deferral and  does not represent more      does not represent more
payment in    than one third of that staff than one fourth of the staff
instruments   member's total annual        member's annual total
ñ CRD Article total remuneration. For      remuneration.
94(3)         the purposes of this point
              Member States may
              modify the thresholds
              referred to herein taking
              into account the
              particularities of the
              remuneration practices in
              the relevant national
              market and the
              responsibilities and job
              profile of those staff
              members.
                                                                         59

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Scope of       Recital 5:                   Recital 5:                     We do not agree with the         We recommend keeping the EC wording or, alternatively, harmonising
proportionali  (Ö) they should be           (Ö) it is necessary to exempt  wording proposed by the EP       the application of proportionality principles throughout sectoral specific
ty principle ñ allowed to exempt at a       in the Directive small and     since it is less flexible and    regulation. As such, we note that under ESMA guidelines on
CRD Recital 5  minimum small and non-       non-complex institutions       does not take into account       remuneration under AIFMD, AIFMs are also allowed to dissaply the ex
               complex institutions and     and staff members with low     the particularities of the       post incorporation of risk for variable remuneration (corresponding to
               staff members with low       levels of remuneration from    remuneration practices in the    point (n) of paragraph 1 of Article 94 of CRD) and the requirement to
               levels of remuneration       the principles on deferral     relevant national market.        establish a remuneration committee (corresponding to Article 95 of
               from, at least, deferral and and pay out in instruments.                                     CRD). At least these two principles should therefore be added to the list
               pay out in instruments                                                                       of principles that can be dissaplied under CRD.
               requirements entirely.       (16) Article 94 is amended
               (16) Article 94 is amended   as follows:
               as follows:                  3.By way of derogation from
               3.By way of derogation       paragraph 1, the principles
               from paragraph 1, the        set out in points (l), (m) and
               requirements set out in      in the second subparagraph
               points (l), (m) and in the   of point (o) shall not apply
               second subparagraph of       to:
               point (o) shall, at a
               minimum, not apply to:
Remuneratio    The EBF supports Article     We strongly reject             Indeed, the annual earnings      We consider that maintaining the current flexibility (i.e. period of
n - Variable   94 (CRD) of the Council      Parliament proposal to         and cost of living and the       deferral from 3 to 5 years minimum and the deferral correctly aligned
elements of    compromise because it        defer the variable             maturity and weight of the       with the nature of business, its risks and the activities of the member of
remuneratio    allows Member States to      remuneration of material       financial sector are very        staff in question) is necessary, including for senior management and
nñ             have flexibility to adapt    risk takers over a period      different across European        high earners, due to the present context of transformation of the
-CRD Art.94-   the level of individual      which is not less than 5       countries. Consequently, it      banking sector.
               remuneration and entity      years.                         would be more consistent to
               size thresholds level                                       keep the ability for Member
               according to the local                                      States to set lower thresholds
               living standards and local                                  aligned with the local market
               banking market.                                             cost-of-living and
                                                                           characteristics of the financial
                                                                           sector.
                                                                           However, we regret that
                                                                           there still remains an
                                                                           ambiguity as to whether the
                                                                           subsidiaries of large banking
                                                                                            60

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                        groups should be regarded as
                                                                        large institutions as defined in
                                                                        point (1) of Article 430a of
                                                                        Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
Remuneratio                                The EBF supports Article                                       Support the EP ECON Compromise text.
n-                                         109 (CRD) as amended by
Institutionsí                              the EP which correctly
arrangement                                addresses the issue of
s, processes                               potential conflicts between
and                                        the CRD remuneration
mechanisms                                 policy and other specific
ñ                                          sectorial remuneration
-CRD Art.                                  requirements, both for EU
109-                                       based entities and third
                                           country-based entities.
Consolidated  (25a) In Article 109, the    25) In Article 109,          We support EP ECON                We would like to add another exemption for subsidiaries that are
application   following paragraph 4 is     paragraphs 2 and 3 are       proposal.                         subject to CRD that would:
of            added:                       replaced by the following    The remuneration
remuneratio   4. The remuneration          ì(Ö) Subsidiary              requirements shall not apply      ìsubsidiary undertakings developing technology-enabled innovation in
n rules       requirements laid down in    undertakings, not            on a consolidated basis to a      financial services that could result inÖî
              Articles 92, 94 and 95 shall themselves subject to this   subsidiary undertakings not
              not apply on a               Directive, shall comply with subject to CRD. The EP            For the purpose of this exemption, EBA should be empowered to develop
              consolidated basis to        their sector specific        proposal also has the merit to    draft regulatory standards specifying the type of entities that would fall
              either of the following:     requirements on solo level.î clarify that in case of conflict  within this fintech category.
              (a)       subsidiary                                      of legislation for group risk
              undertakings established     3a. For the purpose of       takers, specific sector
              in the Union where those     paragraph 2, EBA shall in    legislation shall prevail.
              are subject to specific      consultation with ESMA
              remuneration                 develop draft regulatory     We encourage the possibility
              requirements in              standards with respect to    to free up resources to
              accordance with other        the practical aspects of the support            infrastructure
              instruments of Union law;    application of the           financing, crucial to revamp
              (b)       subsidiary         remuneration rules under     the economy. We deem
              undertakings established     this Directive to subsidiary however that the list of
              in a third country where     undertakings, not            eligibility criteria is too
              these would be subject to                                 restrictive, thus limiting the
                                                                                        61

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
     specific    remuneration    themselves subject to this     qualifying projects. Therefore,
     requirements             in Directive.                     we support amendments
     accordance with other       Taking into account the        aiming at maximizing the
     instruments of Union law if institutionsí size, internal   effectiveness       of      the
     they were established in    organisation and the nature,   supporting factor.
     the Unionî. Maintains       the scope and the
     wording      from      the  complexity of their activities
     Commission                  as well as that the specific
                                 sector legislation shall
                                 prevail where specific
                                 requirements of this
                                 Directive may conflict with
                                 the sectorial requirements,
                                 these draft regulatory
                                 standards shall specify the
                                 qualitative and appropriate
                                 quantitative criteria to
                                 identify categories of group
                                 risk takers as well as the
                                 classes of instruments
                                 which reflect the groupís
                                 risk profile.
                                 In this context, EBA shall
                                 assess in consultation with
                                 ESMA, and amend if
                                 necessary, the existing
                                 regulatory technical
                                 standards on criteria to
                                 identify categories of staff
                                 whose professional
                                 activities have a material
                                 impact on an institutionís
                                 risk profile under Article 92
                                 paragraph 2 of this
                                 Directive.
                                                                              62

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                        Power is delegated to the
                        Commission to adopt the
                        regulatory         technical
                        standards referred to in this
                        paragraph in accordance
                        with Article 10 to 14 of
                        Regulation      (EU)      No
                        1093/2010. "Includes some
                        provisions that allow more
                        freedom for lenders.
                                                      63

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Supporting finance and infrastructure
Issue/Refere European Council          European Parliament             EBF Position                  EBF Recommendations
nce          Position                  Position
Maintain     Council of the EU        European Parliament              Given the fact that SMEs      We support the Parliament position, as this will allow to reduce the
and extend   proposes to completely   proposes to calculate Risk       carry a lower systematic risk capital requirements not only for small and micro businesses, but
the SME      amend the current        weighted exposures to SMEs       than larger corporates,       also for medium enterprises that in several jurisdictions are the real
Supporting   formulation of the       with a formula that expands      capital requirements for SME  driving force of EU economy.
Factor (SF)  article to a supporting  the Commission original          exposures should be lower
             factor that is not bound proposal from EUR 1,500,000      than those for large
             by any specific number,  to 3,000,000                     corporates to ensure an
             as the calculation would                                  optimal bank financing of
             be adjusted to the                                        SMEs. We support the EP
             different exposures.                                      amendment which raises the
                                                                       threshold to EUR 3,000,000.
Green        Does not consider the    The EBA, after consulting        The review of the CRR is a    Parliament and Council should agree to adopt a common position
Supporting   possibility of assessing Calls for the ESRB, shall        timely opportunity to         that ensures the EBA is the authority tackling the work regarding
Factor       its inclusion.           assess on the basis of           explore and test the merits   the prudential treatment of assets exposed to sustainable activities,
                                      available data and the           of a green supporting factor  while we strongly advocate to change the timeline for
                                      findings of the High Level       that would recognise the      implementation to a more pressing one, that would match the
                                      Expert Group on Sustainable      beneficial nature of such     sense of urgency that sustainability brings to the table.
                                      Finance of the Commission        assets for the energy
                                      possibility of whether a         transition and the            This new timeline should not compromise the collection of all
                                      dedicated            prudential  decarbonisation of banksí     necessary data to ensure a well-documented and high-quality
                                      treatment of assets exposed      balance sheets.               results when assessing the assets.
                                      to     activities    associated                                Both the development of the taxonomy for sustainable
                                      substantially              with  EBF therefore welcomes the    investments, and in parallel, further research on the implications of
                                      environmental and / or social    proposal of the parliament    a Green Supporting Factor and its calibration are critical to ensure a
                                      objectives, in the form of       with regards to the EBA       proper understanding of the impact the financial sector and, in
                                      different capital charges,       tackling this work, and we    particular, banks will have in financing a sustainable future.
                                      would be justified from a        would like to see an
                                      prudential perspective. In       agreement with the Council    In this sense, we would like to propose that the European Council
                                      particular,       EBA      shall in this regard. However, we   supports the proposal of the European Parliament, thus allowing a
                                      investigate:                     understand that the position  balanced approach regarding the Green Supporting Factor. One that
                                      i.        methodological         could be improved, as         it is cautious enough to understand the impacts it can have for
                                                                                     64

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                       options       for     assessing   timeline to be followed could   financing the economy, while setting it into a flexible wording that
                       exposures of asset classes to     be shorter, understanding       permits further revision and calibration when evidence arises. We
                       activities           associated   that such a research by the     would just like to remark that time is of the essence and a more
                       substantially               with  EBA needs time to build up      pressing timeframe would be very much welcomed.
                       environmental and/or social       the necessary facts, and
                       objectives;                       taking into account the
                            i. specific                  political timeline, the impact
                                 methodology          to on the banking sector would
                                 assess exposures to     not be felt until several years
                                 sustainable             pass, and understanding the
                                 assets/activities;      urgency        of      tackling
                            ii. risk profiles of assets  sustainability concerns this is
                                 exposed              to not the most appropriate
                                 sustainable activities  timeframe.
                                 which are associated
                                 substantially     with
                                 environmental
                                 and/or           social
                                 objectives;
                            iii. risks related to the
                                 depreciation         of
                                 assets     due       to
                                 regulatory changes
                                 such as climate
                                 change mitigation;
                            iv. potential effects of a
                                 dedicated prudential
                                 treatment of assets
                                 exposed              to
                                 sustainable activities
                                 which are associated
                                 substantially     with
                                 environmental
                                 and/or           social
                                 objectives          on
                                 financial     stability
                                                                       65

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                        and bank lending in
                                        the Union.
                              The EBA shall submit a report
                              on its findings to the
                              Commission, the European
                              Parliament and the Council by
                              [two years after entry into
                              force of this regulation].
                               On the basis of this report,
                              the Commission shall, if
                              appropriate, submit to the
                              European Parliament and the
                              Council a legislative
                              proposal."..
Credit risk ñ                 The EBF supports the           Many institutions already      Nevertheless, the following adjustment should be considered:
infrastructur                 amendment brought by the       apply Equator Principles (EPs) ìRegarding new projects to be built, an assessment (as per internal
e financing -                 Parliament report on           and other systems of           lendersí review) whether the exposure delivers globally a positive
assessment                    paragraph (1)(ba) of article   assessing environmental and    environmentally and socially sustainable impact, such as the
of the                        501a.                          social impacts to new          sustainability objectives as laid out Article 9 paragraph 2 of
environment                                                  projects.                      Regulation (EU) 2015/1017, is conducted and risks potentially
al and social                                                                               identified in the report referred to in Article 501(da) are taken into
impact                                                                                      account;î
-CRR Art.
501a(1)(ba)-
Credit risk ñ                 The EBF supports the           The sale of electricity for    However, the EBF would like to amend the proposal paragraph
infrastructur                 amendment brought by the       example, can be to a large     (1)(g)(i) of article 501a of the Parliament report in the following way:
e financing -                 Parliament report on           number of users, through a     ìthe contractual arrangements provide lenders with a high degree of
Revenue of                    paragraph (1)(g)(i) of article trading company which sells    protection including the following: (i) where the revenues of the
the obligor                   501a stating that revenues     to distributors, which         obligor are not funded directly or indirectly by a large number of
-CRR Art.                     may be funded directly or      themselves sell to end users.  users, or unless the entity is replaceable without a significant
501a(1)(g)(i)                 indirectly by a large number                                  change in the level and timing of revenues; the contractual
-                             of users.                                                     arrangements shall include provisions that effectively protect lenders
                                                                                            against losses resulting from the termination of the project by the
                                                                                            party which agrees to purchase the goods or services provided by the
                                                                                            obligor"
                                                                            66

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                                                                       Requesting termination amounts covering debt amount in case of
                                                                                                       termination of the offtake contract would exclude the majority of
                                                                                                       projects which benefit from offtake contracts. In case of termination
                                                                                                       of the offtake contract, as long as the good or service can be sold on
                                                                                                       an existing spot market or other possible off-takers (counterparties of
                                                                                                       a sale contract) the project should be considered as eligible to 501a,
                                                                                                       even though there is no termination amount. Generally, when the
                                                                                                       project is located in a region where there is no real spot market,
                                                                                                       termination indemnities are included in the offtake contract, like in
                                                                                                       the Middle East for example. If not included, it is because the project
                                                                                                       could find another off-taker or sell on the spot market, getting also an
                                                                                                       indemnity for the offtake contract termination in court, such
                                                                                                       indemnity completing market revenues.
Credit risk ñ The EBF considers that none of the Council compromise     In some cases, for good        The EBF would like to amend paragraph (1)(g)(vii) of article 501a in
infrastructur and the Parliament report are satisfactory regarding debt projects and predictable cash  the following way: ìthere are contractual restrictions on the ability of
e financing - issuance restrictions.                                    flows, additional              the obligor to perform activities that may be detrimental to lenders,
Obligor                                                                 indebtedness can be            including the restriction that new debt cannot be issued beyond a
additional                                                              acceptable below               predetermined threshold without the consent of existing debt
indebtedness                                                            predetermined thresholds.      providers, such threshold being expressed for example as a fixed
-CRR                                                                    Such threshold can be          amount or as a financial covenant (such as a ratio of Debt to Equity,
501a(1)(g)(vi                                                           expressed for example as a     or of leverage (Debt to Ebitda) or a Debt Service Cover Ratio (Cash
i)-                                                                     fixed amount or as a financial Available for Debt Service/ Debt service), etc).î
                                                                        covenant (such as a ratio of
                                                                        Debt to Equity, or of leverage
                                                                        (Debt to Ebitda) or a Debt
                                                                        Service Cover Ratio (Cash
                                                                        Available for Debt Service/
                                                                        Debt service), etc.). Loan
                                                                        documentation in several
                                                                        instances allows obligors to
                                                                        issue new financial
                                                                        indebtedness within certain
                                                                        financial covenants, which
                                                                        depend on the nature of the
                                                                        transaction.
                                                                                       67

        Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Credit risk ñ                  The paragraph 1(i) of article  The EBF believes the focus     Alternatively, we believe any condition to ensure construction phase
infrastructur                  501a of the Parliament report  must instead be made on the    risks are adequately mitigated should rather be introduced to ensure
e financing -                  must be deleted since this set quality of the contractors(s), the contractor has a satisfactory financial strength and expertise and
Criteria to be                 of conditions is overly        of the construction            provides comfort through a package of guarantees / performance
fulfilled by                   restrictive and will lead to   contract(s) and on the related bonds covering liquidated damages in case of delay or low
equity                         exclude a majority of          securities (LDs and            performances. Besides, equity injections by sponsors can adequately
investors                      European infrastructure        performance bonds;Ö).          be secured by guarantees / LCs.
when the                       project opportunities. Many
obligor is in                  infrastructure projects are
construction                   pursued by ìdevelopersî in
phase                          the energy sector or by
-CRR Art.                      financial sponsors. Those,
501a(1)(i)-                    exactly as industrials would,
                               are used to award the
                               construction contract to
                               experienced / highly
                               reputable contractors.
Credit risk ñ                  The EBF considers that the                                    The EBF would like to amend the Parliament report proposal on
infrastructur                  amendment of the                                              paragraph 2(a)(iv) of article 501a in the following way:
e financing -                  Parliament report on                                          ìIt is partly regulated or contractually fixed and in addition the
Regulated or                   paragraph 2(a)(iv) of article                                 project is resilient to downside sensitivities regarding price or volume
contractually                  501a is not satisfactory.                                     risk, or a combination of both.î
fixed                          Due to their low risk profile,
revenues                       the EBF considers that the
-CRR                           vast majority of renewables
Art.501a(2)(                   power generation projects
a)(iv)-                        financed on a limited-
                               recourse basis should be
                               included in the scope of the
                               revised Article 501a.
                               The Parliamentís proposal is
                               too restrictive and it is not
                               consistent with the other
                               criteria detailed in the same
                               paragraph.
                                                                             68

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Credit risk ñ                The EBF is of the view that     Indeed, the rating of some      The EBF would like to amend the Parliament report proposal on
infrastructur                when the party purchasing       national utilities can be       paragraph 2(b)(ii) of article 501a in the following way:
e financing -                goods or services provided by   constrained by the country      ìA PSE with an ECAI rating with a credit quality step of at least 3
Party                        the obligor is a PSE, the ECAI  rating while the implicit or    (except if the PSE benefits from the implicit or explicit support of an
purchasing                   rating of the PSE should not    explicit support of the         authority listed under (i) above in which case (i) applies);î
the goods or                 be restrictive in case this PSE government (or any of those
services                     is benefiting from the implicit institutions can benefit to the
provided by                  or explicit support of an       obligor.
the obligor                  authority listed under
-CRR Art.                    paragraph 2(b)(i) of art 501a
501a(2)(b)(ii)               ie ìa central government,
-                            regional government or local
                             authorityî.
Credit risk ñ                In order to avoid risky                                         The EBF would like to amend the Parliament report proposals on the
infrastructur                transactions, the Parliamentís                                  following paragraphs:
e financing -                proposals for specifying the                                    - 1(c) of article 501a: ìthe major source of repayment of the
National or                  case of public subsidies                                        obligation is the income generated by the assets being financed, or
international                should focus on project                                         from national or international subsidies, grants or investments from
subsidies                    finance structures.                                             public bodies or other legal entities in the area of public services,
-CRR Art.                                                                                    limited to Project Finance structures under regulated framework;î
501a(1)(c),
501a(1)(f) &                                                                                 - 1(f) of article 501a: ìthe re-financing risk of the exposure is low or
501a(2)(b)-                                                                                  adequately mitigated; also due to sufficient national or international
                                                                                             subsidies, grants or investments from public bodies or other legal
                                                                                             entities in the area of public services, limited to Project Finance
                                                                                             structures under regulated framework;î
                                                                                             - 2(b) of article 501a: ìwhere the revenues of the obligor are not
                                                                                             funded by payments from a large number of users or from national or
                                                                                             international subsidies, grants or investments from public bodies or
                                                                                             other legal entities, limited to Project Finance structures under
                                                                                             regulated framework, the party which agrees to purchase the goods
                                                                                             or services provided by the obligor shall be one of the followingî
                                                                             69

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Credit risk ñ                                                         The EBF would like to amend the proposal paragraph (1)(j) of
infrastructu                                                          article 501a of the Parliament report in the following way:
re financing                                                          ìthe obligor has adequate safeguards to ensure completion of
-                                                                     the project according to the agreed specification, budget or
Safeguards                                                            completion date; including strong completion guarantees; or
to ensure                                                             experienced constructor providing adequate liquidated
completion                                                            damages with satisfactory construction contracts and related
of the                                                                securities;î
project
-CRR Art.
501a(1)(j)
                                                          70

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Securitisations
Issue/Refere  European Council  European Parliament             EBF Position                     EBF Recommendations
nce           Position          Position
Securitisatio                  The EBF welcomes the             The purpose of this              Support the Parliament proposal.
ns                             amendment to article 14          amendment is to restate the
-CRR Art. 14-                  (CRR) brought by the             obligations applying to such
                               Parliament report to narrow      subsidiaries of EU banks along
                               the obligations which will       the lines of the currently
                               apply to non-EU consolidated     applicable regulation, and to
                               subsidiaries of EU institutions. clarify the references in
                                                                article 14 so that they point to
                                                                the relevant parts of STS
                                                                regulation Chapter 2, instead
                                                                of the deleted Part Five of
                                                                CRR.
                                                                               71

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Credit Risk
Issue/Refere   European Council            European Parliament          EBF Position                  EBF Recommendations
nce            Position                    Position
Recognition                               We strongly support the                                     Support the Parliament proposal.
of credit risk                            Parliament position and
mitigation                                amendment of Art. 247, par.
for                                       3 which would allow Central
securitisatio                             Governments providing
n positions                               unfunded credit protection to
- CRR Art.                                be considered eligible when
247 -                                     compliant with Chapter 4 of
                                          the CRR.
Credit risk ñ  According to Article 132                                 Follow the BCBS standard on   Extend the amendment proposed by the Council by including funds
Eligibility of (3) institutions will not                                equity investment in funds    wherein one of the investors is a development finance institution in a
CIUís for the  be able to apply the look                                (bcbs 266) which applies to   Member State.
look-through   through approach (LTA)                                   banksí investments in funds
and            and/or mandate-based                                     wherever they are established
mandate        approach (MBA) to third                                  ñ the only prerequisite being
based          country funds unless                                     that reliable information is
approach       they have been                                           available for the investor.
(Article       marketed in accordance
132.3(a))      with Article 42 of the AIF
               Directive. The fall back
               approach (1,250% risk
               weight) would then
               apply to any investments
               in third country funds
               which have not been
               marketed that way. The
               EBF supports the
               proposed extension by
               the Council.
               Nevertheless, in
               particular regulated
                                                                                       72

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
              development banks
              often seek investment
              opportunities on their
              own behalf without
              reverting to funds being
              actively marketed within
              the EU (known as a
              ìreverse solicitationî.
              These exposures are
              only partially captured
              by the Council proposal.
Credit risk -                          The EBF welcomes the          Consequently, the EBF supports   Proposed Amendment to Art. 111:
Minimum                                amendments proposed in the    Article 132(8) (CRR) of the      ìFor off-balance sheet minimum value commitments that represent
value                                  Parliament report that enable Parliament report but would      an obligation to compensate an investment into units or shares of one
commitment                             to maintain the 20% CCF       like to introduce the following  or more CIUs if the market value of the underlying exposure of the
- Own funds                            currently applied to Minimum  changes to avoid any             CIU or CIUs falls below a certain factor, a conversion factor the
requirements                           Value Commitments.            misinterpretation and keep the   exposure value is multiplied by a percentage of 20% is applied to
for                                                                  same wording used in Article     determine the exposure value if:
exposures in                                                         111 (CRR) for off-balance sheet  (i) the current market value of the underlying exposures of the CIU
the form of                                                          items: (see right column)        covers or exceeds the present value of the threshold and
units or                                                                                              (ii) if the institution or another undertaking that is included in the
shares in                                                                                             same scope of consolidation can influence the composition of the
CIUs ñ                                                                                                underlying exposures of the CIU with a view to limiting the potential
-CRR Art. 132                                                                                         for a further reduction of the excess, or to the extent that the
& 111-                                                                                                institution has subordinated its guarantee to the application by the
                                                                                                      CIU or CIUs of guidelines that will have the same effect of limiting the
                                                                                                      potential for a further reduction of the excess.î.
Credit risk -                          Regarding the 20% CCF         As this 20% CCF should be        Proposed Amendment to Art. 152:
Minimum                                introduced in Article 132(8)  extended to exposures            ì(9) For off-balance sheet minimum value commitments that
value                                  (CRR) of the Parliament       calculated with internal models, represent an obligation to compensate an investment into units or
commitment                             report, we understand that    a new paragraph (9) has to be    shares of one or more CIUs if the market value of the underlying
- Own funds                            this CCF could be only        added in Article 152 (CRR) of    exposure of the CIU or CIUs falls below a certain factor, the
requirements                           applicable to standardised    the Parliament report. (see      exposure value is multiplied by a percentage of 20
for                                    exposures.                    right column)                    if:
exposures in
                                                                                    73

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
the form of                                                                                (i)        the current market value of the underlying exposures of the
units or                                                                                   CIU covers or exceeds the present value of the threshold and
shares in                                                                                  (ii) if the institution or another undertaking that is included in the
CIUs ñ                                                                                     same scope of consolidation can influence the composition of the
-CRR Art. 132                                                                              underlying exposures of the CIU with a view to limiting the potential
& 152-                                                                                     for a further reduction of the excess, or to the extent that the
                                                                                           institution has subordinated its guarantee to the application by the
                                                                                           CIU or CIUs of guidelines that will have the same effect of limiting
                                                                                           the potential for a further reduction of the excess.î
Credit risk -                The EU Parliament has           In order to avoid any         The EBF notably needs more explanations on the scope of targeted
Minimum                      introduced a new Article 132c   misunderstanding, the EBF     exposures and the link between Ai and Ei factors.
value                        (CRR) related to the RWA        would like to have further
commitment                   calculation for off-balance     clarifications about the
ñ                            sheet exposures to CIUs.        rationale and the outcome of
Treatment of                                                 Article 132c (CRR) of the
off-balance                                                  Parliament report.
sheet
exposures to
CIUs
-CRR Art.
132c-
Credit risk -                In addition to the 20% CCF,     Nevertheless, the exemption   Consequently, Article 400(1)(la) (CRR) of the Parliament report should
Minimum                      the EBF welcomes the            should be applicable to       be amended in the following way: ì(la) Exposures arising from a
value                        amendment proposed by the       exposures calculated with the minimum value commitment that meets all of the requirements
commitment                   EU Parliament to extend the     standardised approach and     according to Article 132(8) and Article 152(9)."
ñ Exemptions                 large exposuresí exemptions     internal models.
ñ                            to Minimum Value
-CRR Art.                    Commitments introduced in
400-                         Article 400(1)(la) (CRR) of the
                             Parliament report.
                                                                            74

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Recognising the single market and banking union
Issue/Refere European Council             European Parliament EBF Position                     EBF Recommendations
nce          Position                     Position
G-SII and O- 2a.       An additional                          The EBF supports Article 131     We support the EU Council position which includes the recognition of
SII scoring  identification                                   (CRD) of the Council             the banking union as a single jurisdiction in measuring the level of
-CRD Art.    methodology for G-SIIs                           compromise that includes an      cross-border activities in the G-SIIs methodology.
131-         shall be based on the                            alternative approach which       It should be however applied consistently and without constraints,
             following categories:                            recognizes the EU as a single    providing financial institutions with the possibility of both falling in a
High         (a)       the categories                         jurisdiction.                    lower GSII bucket (as foreseen) as well as falling off the GSII list (not
Importance   referred to in points (a) to                     Nevertheless, we deplore the     currently foreseen)
             (d) of paragraph 2;                              fact that the review of the      It should also be applied to O-SIIs to be consistent with BU recognition
             (b)       cross-border                           methodology only concerns        aspiration and to avoid any level playing field issue.
             activity of the group,                           G-SIIs and does not include O-
             excluding the group's                            SIIs.
             activities across                                Indeed, the rationale for the
             participating Member                             Banking Union recognition is
             States as defined in Article                     the same for all entities,
             4 of Regulation (EU) No                          another approach would
             806/2014 .                                       unduly restrict the potential
             Each category shall receive                      beneficiaries and represents a
             an equal weighting and                           disincentive to cross-border
             shall consist of                                 investments.
             quantifiable indicators. For
             the categories referred to                       In addition, although this point
             in point (a) the indicators                      is not very explicit in the
             shall be the same as the                         article, we understand that
             corresponding indicators                         there is a wish to maintain an
             determined pursuant to                           add-on floor of 1%, which
             paragraph 2.                                     could raise an issue of level
             The additional                                   playing field between G-SIIs.
             identification                                   Allowing to apply a 0.5% G-SII
             methodology shall                                buffer would be positive as it
             produce an additional                            would smooth the cliff effect
             overall score for each                           (up and down).
                                                                             75

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
            entity as referred to in
            paragraph 1 assessed, on                Both      restrictions      would
            the basis of which                      automatically        limit     the
            competent or designated                 expected additional financing
            authorities may take one                capacity of many banks at a
            of the measures referred                time       where        European
            to in point (c) of paragraph            economic growth is gathering
            10.                                     pace and need financing.
            3.        O-SIIs shall be               Both      restrictions      seem
            identified in accordance                unnecessary        as     national
            with paragraph 1.                       authorities have already the
            Systemic importance shall               power to impose a higher
            be assessed on the basis                buffer thanks to the Systemic
            of at least any of the                  Risk Buffer.
            following criteria:
            (a)       size;
            (b)       importance for
            the economy of the Union
            or of the relevant Member
            State;
Waivers on                                          We deem that making                We therefore support the Commissionís position, as it best recognises
prudential                                          available the possibility to       the progress that has been made to establish a banking union with
requieremen                                         waive capital requirements         facilitated cross-border business.
ts                                                  for cross-border groups
(Art. 7)                                            remains crucially important        Parliaments proposal, to introduce a cap to the amount that can be
                                                    and in line with the consistent    waived at 25% of the minimum own fund requirements, is not
High                                                progress reached at both           feasible. The theoretical advantage of such a waiver, will be
Importance                                          global and EU level on             eliminated by the administrative.
                                                    financial stability measures,
                                                    first amongst which the
                                                    Banking Union.
                                                                   76

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Waivers on                      The EBF welcomes the        Nevertheless, the EBF          Importantly, the NSFR should always apply at consolidated level as
liquidity                       refinements to the          considers that the             long-term funding is typically managed at this level; this would also
requirements                    preferential treatment      preferential treatment         avoid that the introduction of the NSFR results in additional
(Art. 8)                        applied to intragroup       should apply automatically     elements of fragmentation.
                                transactions, as drafted in (i.e. without the pre-approval
High                            the Parliament report in    of competent authorities) to   We support the Parliamentís proposal, which is in line with the
Importance                      article 428h (CRR, NSFR).   transactions between           Commissionís proposal, as these proposals better recognise the
                                                            institutions located in the    progress that has been made to establish a banking union with
                                                            Banking union, which is more   facilitated cross-border business.
                                                            efficient from an economic
                                                            point of view as solo level
                                                            requirements will be
                                                            impacted by many
                                                            asymmetries on RSF/ASF
                                                            rates on operations between
                                                            financial counterparts (NSFR
                                                            ratio ñ CRR Article 428h).
                                                            These asymmetries may
                                                            create additional funding
                                                            needs at solo level, which do
                                                            not exist at group level. We
                                                            deem that making available
                                                            the possibility to liquidity
                                                            requirements for cross-
                                                            border groups remains
                                                            crucially important and in
                                                            line with the consistent
                                                            progress reached at both
                                                            global and EU level on
                                                            financial stability measures,
                                                            first amongst which the
                                                            Banking Union.
                                                            Importantly, the NSFR should
                                                            always apply at consolidated
                                                            level as long-term funding is
                                                                          77

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                           typically managed at this
                                                           level; this would also avoid
                                                           that the introduction of the
                                                           NSFR results in additional
                                                           elements of fragmentation
                                                           (CRR Article 8.
Treatment                      The EBF welcomes the        Nevertheless, the EBF          We are of the view that intragroup exemptions in the risk-based and
for                            refinements to the          considers that the             leverage frameworks should be allowed on a non-discretionary basis
intragroup                     preferential treatment      preferential treatment         in CRR Article 113(6). Particularly urgent is the consideration of
transactions                   applied to intragroup       should apply automatically     intragroup exposures, which must be excluded from large exposure
-CRR Art.                      transactions, as drafted in (i.e. without the pre-approval limits (CRR Article 400), particularly in the context of the Banking
428h-                          the Parliament report in    of competent authorities) to   Union, if the competent authority is satisfied that the necessary
                               article 428h (CRR, NSFR).   transactions between           conditions are met.
                                                           institutions located in the
                                                           Banking union, which is more
                                                           efficient from an economic
                                                           point of view as solo level
                                                           requirements will be
                                                           impacted by many
                                                           asymmetries on RSF/ASF
                                                           rates on operations between
                                                           financial counterparts (NSFR
                                                           ratio ñ CRR Article 428h).
                                                           These asymmetries may
                                                           create additional funding
                                                           needs at solo level, which do
                                                           not exist at group level.
                                                                         78

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Proportionality
Issue/Refere  European Council            European Parliament Position     EBF Position                     EBF Recommendations
nce           Position
Definition of (4) "small institution"     (144a) "small and non-           The     EBF    welcomes     the   EBF Amendment :
small and     means an institution that   complex institution" means       definition of small and non-      ì(144a) "small and non-complex institution" means an institution that
non-          meets all of the            an institution that meets all of complex institutions included in  meets all of the following conditions, provided that it is not a large
complex       following conditions,       the following conditions,        Article 4(1)(144a) of the         institution as defined in point (144b):
institutions  provided that it is not a   provided that it is not a large  Parliament report.
-CRR Art.     large institution as        institution as defined in point                                    (a)       the total value of its assets on an individual basis or, where
4(1)(144a)    defined in point (1)        (144b):                                                            applicable, on a consolidated basis in accordance with this Regulation
for EP and                                                                                                   and Directive 2013/36/EU is on average equal to or less than the
CRR Art.      (a)       the value of its  (a)       the total value of its                                   threshold of EUR 5 billion over the four-year period immediately
430a(4) for   assets on an individual     assets on an individual basis                                      preceding the current annual disclosure period;
Council-      basis or, where             or, where applicable, on a
              applicable, on a            consolidated basis in                                              (b)       the institution is subject to no obligations or is subject to
              consolidated basis in       accordance with this                                               simplified obligations in relation to recovery and resolution planning in
              accordance with this        Regulation and Directive                                           accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2014/59/EU;
              Regulation and Directive    2013/36/EU is on average
              2013/36/EU is on            equal to or less than the                                          (c)       its trading book business is classified as small ñ less than 10%
              average equal to or less    threshold of EUR 5 billion over                                    of the institutionsís total assets and less than EUR 300 million as defined
              than the threshold of       the four-year period                                               in Article325a (1).;
              EUR 5 billion over the      immediately preceding the
              four-year period            current annual disclosure                                          (d)       the total value of its derivative positions is less than or equal to
              immediately preceding       period;                                                            2% of its total on- and off-balance sheet assets, whereby only
              the current annual                                                                             derivatives which qualify as positions held with trading intent are
              disclosure period.          (b)       the institution is                                       included in calculating the derivative positions;
              Member States may           subject to no obligations or is
              provide for a lower         subject to simplified                                              (e)       the institution does not use internal models for calculating its
              threshold;                  obligations in relation to                                         own funds requirements;
                                          recovery and resolution
              (b)       the institution's planning in accordance with                                        (f)       the institution has not communicated to the competent
              trading book and            Article 4 of Directive                                             authority an objection to being classified as a small and non-complex
              derivative activities do    2014/59/EU;                                                        institution;
              not exceed the
                                                                                        79

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
     thresholds set out in         (c)       its trading book          (g)       the competent authority has not decided that the institution is
     Articles 94 (1) and 273a      business is classified as small     not to be considered a small and non-complex institution based on an
     (2), respectively;            within the meaning of Article       analysis of its size, interconnectedness, complexity or risk profile;
                                   94;
     (c)        more than 75%
     of both the institution's     (d)       the total value of its    By way of derogation from point a and provided that the competent
     consolidated total assets     derivative positions is less        authority considers this to be necessary, the competent authority may
     and liabilities, excluding    than or equal to 2% of its total    at its discretion lower the threshold value from EUR 5 billion to as low
     in both cases the             on- and off-balance sheet           as EUR 1,5 billion or to as low as 1% of the gross domestic product of
     intragroup exposures,         assets, whereby only                the Member State in which the institution is established, provided that
     relate to activities with     derivatives which qualify as        the amount equalling 1% of the gross domestic product of the Member
     counterparties located in     positions held with trading         State in question is smaller than EUR 1,5 billion;
     the European Economic         intent are included in              By way of derogation from point (e) the competent authority may allow
     Area;                         calculating the derivative          the limited use of internal models for calculating the own funds
                                   positions;                          requirements for subsidiaries using the internal models developed at
     (d)        the institution                                        group level, provided that the group is subject to the disclosure
     does not use internal         (e)       the institution does      requirements laid down in Article 433a or in Article 433c at consolidated
     models to meet the            not use internal models for         level.î
     prudential requirements       calculating its own funds
     that it is subject to in      requirements;
     accordance with this                                              Too many to fail being as dangerous as too big to fail, the Small and
     Regulation except for         (f)       the institution has       non-complex category shall remain a category of exceptions.
     subsidiaries using            not communicated to the             As such the number of institutions benefiting from derogations should
     internal models               competent authority an              be limited (like under AnaCredit).
     developed at the group        objection to being classified       We propose therefore that Small and non-complex institutionsí assets
     level, provided that the      as a small and non-complex          of one country should not exceed 10% of the total banking assets
     group is subject to the       institution;                        within the Member State in question
     disclosure requirements
     laid down in article 433a     (g)       the competent
     or in article 433c at         authority has not decided that
     consolidated level;           the institution is not to be
                                   considered a small and non-
     (e)        the institution is complex institution based on
     subject to simplified         an analysis of its size,
     obligations in relation to    interconnectedness,
     recovery and resolution       complexity or risk profile;
                                                                    80

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
     planning in accordance
     with Article 4 of
     Directive 2014/59/EU;  By way of derogation from
                            point a and provided that the
                            competent authority
                            considers this to be necessary,
                            the competent authority may
                            at its discretion lower the
                            threshold value from EUR 5
                            billion to as low as EUR 1,5
                            billion or to as low as 1% of
                            the gross domestic product of
                            the Member State in which
                            the institution is established,
                            provided that the amount
                            equalling 1% of the gross
                            domestic product of the
                            Member State in question is
                            smaller than EUR 1,5 billion;
                            By way of derogation from
                            point (e) the competent
                            authority may allow the
                            limited use of internal models
                            for calculating the own funds
                            requirements for subsidiaries
                            using the internal models
                            developed at group level,
                            provided that the group is
                            subject to the disclosure
                            requirements laid down in
                            Article 433a or in Article 433c
                            at consolidated level.
                                                            81

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Definition of (1) ''large institution''   (144b) ëlarge institutioní       The EBF favours the Council        EBF Amendment:
large         means an institution that   means an institution that        proposal but with an
institutions  meets any of the            meets any of the following       amendment regarding criteria       Para. (c) should be deleted because as a criteria for defining
-CRR Art.     following conditions:       conditions:                      (c). Being the second biggest      proportionality is pointless:
4(1)(144b)-                                                                bank in a jurisdiction would not
for EP and    (a)        the institution  (a)       the institution has    automatically mean that this       (c)      the institution is, in the Member State where it is
CRR Art.      has been identified as a    been identified as a global      institution should be qualified as established, one of the three largest institutions by total value of
430a(1) for   global Systemically         systemically important           a large institution if this        assets; except if the institution fulfil the criteria to be qualified as
Council       important institution ('G-  institution (G-SII) in           institution fulfils the definition small and non-complex institution
              SII') in accordance with    accordance with Article          of small and non-complex
              Article 131(1) and (2) of   131(1) and (2) of Directive      institution.
              Directive 2013/36/EU;       2013/36/EU;
              (b)        the institution  (b)       the institution has
              has been identified as      been identified as another
              other systemically          systemically important
              important institution ('O-  institution (O-SII) in
              SII') in accordance with    accordance with Article
              Article 131(1) and (3) of   131(1) and (3) of Directive
              Directive 2013/36/EU;       2013/36/EU;
              (c)        the institution  (c)       the institution is, in
              is, in the Member State     the Member State in which it
              where it is established,    is established, one of the
              one of the three largest    three largest institutions in
              institutions by total       terms of total value of assets;
              value of assets;
                                          (d)       the total value of the
              (d)        the total value  institution's assets on the
              of the institution's assets basis of its consolidated
              on an individual basis or,  situation is equal to or larger
              where applicable, on the    than EUR 30 billion;
              basis of its consolidation
              situation in accordance     (e)       the ratio of its total
              with this Regulation and    assets relative to the GDP of
              Directive 2013/36/EU is     the Member State in which it
                                                                                          82

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
             equal to or larger than is established is on average
             EUR 30 billion;         equal to or larger than 20 %
                                     over the four-year period
                                     immediately preceding the
                                     current annual disclosure
                                     period;
Scope of                             ì(6)       in Germany, the      Concerning the exemption of   EBF Amendment:
exempted                             'Kreditanstalt f¸r              the 14 regional German banks  Delete
entities and                         Wiederaufbau',                  adopted during the Council
impacts on                           'Landwirtschaftliche            compromise on 25 May 2018
the Single                           Rentenbank', 'Bremer            (CRD Art.2(5)(6)), the EBF is
Rulebook                             Aufbau-Bank GmbH',              formally opposed to this
and the                              'Hamburgische Investitions-     exemption that could have
Banking                              und Fˆrderbank',                detrimental impacts on the
Union                                'Investitionsbank Berlin',      Single Rulebook and the
-CRD Art.                            'Investitionsbank des Landes    functioning of the Banking
2(5)-                                Brandenburg',                   Union.
                                     'Investitionsbank Schleswig-
                                     Holstein', 'Investitions- und
                                     Fˆrderbank Niedersachsen ñ
                                     NBank', 'Investitions- und
                                     Strukturbank Rheinland-
                                     Pfalz', 'L-Bank, Staatsbank f¸r
                                     Baden-W¸rttemberg', 'LfA
                                     Fˆrderbank Bayern',
                                     'NRW.BANK', 'Saarl‰ndische
                                     Investitionskreditbank AG',
                                     'S‰chsische Aufbaubank ñ
                                     Fˆrderbank', 'Th¸ringer
                                     Aufbaubank', undertakings
                                     which are recognised under
                                     the
                                     'Wohnungsgemeinn¸tzigkeits
                                     gesetz' as bodies of State
                                     housing policy and are not
                                                                                  83

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                             mainly engaged in banking
                             transactions, and
                             undertakings recognised
                             under that law as non-profit
                             housing undertakings;î;
Scope of                     (f)        if the institution has The EBF supports the initial    EBF Amendment:
exempted                     been established by a regional    proposal made by the EU         (f) its activities are confined to the Member State where its head
entities and                 government or a local             Commission in Article 2(5a)     office is situated;
impacts on                   authority, the majority of its    points d) and h) (CRD) related  (g) the total value of the institution's assets is below EUR 30 billion;
the Single                   activities are confined to the    to the public guarantee and the institution is subject to no obligations or is subject to simplified
Rulebook                     Member State where its head       maximum ratio of the            obligations in relation to recovery and resolution planning in
and the                      office is situated;               institution's total assets over accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2014/59/EU;
Banking                                                        the GDP of the Member State
Union                        (g)        in the case of         respectively. Even if the EU
CRD Art.                     institutions whose own funds      Parliament also introduces
2(5a)-                       requirements, financing needs     conditions to determine the
                             or exposures are guaranteed       scope of exempted entities, its
                             by at less than 75% either        proposals are less constraining
                             directly or indirectly by a       than those introduced by the
                             Member Stateís central            EU Commission.
                             government, regional
                             government or local authority
                             in accordance with point (d),
                             the total value of the
                             institution's assets is below
                             EUR 30 billion;;
                                                                              84

       Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
       Governance
Issue/Refere  European Council  European Parliament             EBF Position                     EBF Recommendations
nce           Position          Position
Governance                     The EBF is against article 88(1) Although the EBF understands     With our proposed amendment, the IT developments could be
- Monitoring                   (CRDCRDCRD) of the               the need to mitigate conflicts   reasonable, the right to privacy of the board members respected, the
by the                         Parliament report.               of interest which can occur      potential candidates to the board undeterred, without prejudicing the
competent                                                       when an institution grants a     sound governance of the banking industry.
authority of                                                    loan to a board member, the
loans to                                                        EBF is against article 88(1)     Consequently, the EBF proposes either to delete or, at least, to amend
related                                                         (CRD) of the Parliament          Article 88(1) (CRD) of the Parliament report in the following way:
parties /                                                       report for the following
Power given                                                     reasons:                         (14a)     In Article 88(1), the following subparagraph is inserted at the
to                                                              - Both the EBA and the ECB       end:
competent                                                       have issued guidelines on how    ìMember States shall at least ensure that management bodies of an
authority to                                                    to take loans into               institutions monitor loans to the members of the management body
limit or                                                        consideration when assessing     in its supervisory function and their related parties on an ongoing
prohibit such                                                   whether members are subject      basis and notify such loans to the competent authority in case they
loans ñ                                                         to concrete conflicts of         could give rise to any conflicts of interest. Competent authorities shall
-CRD Art.                                                       interest (independence of        have the power to prohibit or limit such loans, unless such loans are
88(1)                                                           mind). Furthermore,              ordinary transactions concluded under normal conditions.
                                                                according to art. 88 CRD IV,     The institution shall define the conditions under which such loans, as
HIGH                                                            the management is                declared by the said members, give rise to potential conflicts of
PRIORITY                                                        accountable for the              interests.
                                                                implementation of
                                                                governance arrangements,         Member States shall ensure that loans that are not ordinary
                                                                including the prevention of      transactions concluded under normal conditions are subject to a
                                                                conflicts of interest. The Basel specific approval procedure within the institution.î
                                                                Committee for Banking
                                                                Supervision (BCBS), in its
                                                                Guidelines on Corporate
                                                                governance principles for
                                                                banks, states that the board
                                                                should have a formal written
                                                                conflicts of interest policy
                                                                               85

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             which should include also
                                             adequate procedures (for
                                             transactions with related
                                             parties). Consequently, this
                                             suggested rule would not
                                             bring any added value in this
                                             sense and might dissuade
                                             shareholders to remain or
                                             become board members,
                                             which would be an issue,
                                             especially for cooperative
                                             banks as members of the
                                             management body are by
                                             nature clients and holders of
                                             cooperative shares.
                                             - In Member States,
                                             legislations, regulations and
                                             internal procedures
                                             effectively prevent or mitigate
                                             conflicts of interest which
                                             may affect the members of
                                             the management body.
                                             - The prohibition or the
                                             limitation of a loan suspected
                                             of being affected by a
                                             potential conflict of interest
                                             would be a severe
                                             interference in the
                                             management of a credit
                                             institution.
                                             - Such external supervision of
                                             loans over a wide perimeter
                                             (board members and affiliated
                                                            86

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             parties) which could give rise
                                             to a conflict of interest could
                                             not be traced in practice
                                             through the information
                                             system for certain relatives of
                                             a board member. It could be
                                             impossible for an institution
                                             to cross check a loan offer
                                             proposed to a client with a
                                             member of the management
                                             body although they are
                                             related parties. Indeed, the
                                             related parties can have
                                             different names, the family
                                             circle, the legal persons
                                             related to the board
                                             members, the family
                                             relationships can change
                                             significantly in short periods
                                             of time. It is thus absolutely
                                             impossible for the banks to
                                             identify all the related parties
                                             and to monitor continuously
                                             the professional and personal
                                             environment of each of its
                                             board members. The IT
                                             developments would be
                                             unreasonable at the best, and
                                             more likely unfeasible.
                                             - The interference of the
                                             banks with the personal and
                                             professional life of its board
                                             members could be
                                             problematic considering their
                                             right to personal privacy.
                                                             87

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             - At least, when referring to
                                             loans, the different
                                             characteristics of the loans
                                             should be taken into account
                                             and treated in different ways,
                                             thus loans that are ordinary
                                             transactions concluded under
                                             normal conditions should not
                                             be in the scope of this
                                             provision. For other loans, we
                                             suggest internal approval
                                             procedures which could
                                             include an approval by the
                                             management body in its
                                             supervisory function. In such
                                             case, the involved board
                                             member shall be precluded
                                             from voting on this matter.
                                             - The related parties should
                                             be identified on a declarative
                                             basis by the board members.
                                             The banks should not bear the
                                             burden of identifying all the
                                             related parties to a board
                                             member, it being provided
                                             that such identification of
                                             loan offers made to relatives
                                             of a board member could not
                                             be technically feasible in
                                             certain circumstances.
                                             - The declaration of all these
                                             loans would be a very high
                                             administrative burden. Giving
                                                            88

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                                            the supervisor the power to
                                                            ask for information about
                                                            these loans should be
                                                            sufficient.
Governanc                    The scope of application       Although the EBF              The EBF proposes to amend Article 4(39a) (CRR) of the
e-                           proposed by the European       understands the need to       Parliament report in the following way:
Definition                   Parliament on ìrelated         define the notion of
of related                   partiesî to any ìpersonís      ìRelated Partiesî, it is      ì (3)    Article 4 is amended as follows:
parties ñ                    familyî or ìlegal personî      necessary to have a more      (Ö)
-CRR Art.                    related to the board           consistent and more legible   (da)     the following point 39a is inserted:
4(39a)-                      member is too broad,           definition of "Related        ìrelated partyî means either a natural person or a close
                             vague and not realistic. For   Parties" than the definition  member of that personís family or a legal person that is related
High                         instance, Article 91 (CRD)     provided by Article 4(39a)    to the management body of an institution;î in relation to a
Priority                     of the European Parliament     (CRR) of the Parliament       member of the management body in its supervisory function:
                             report would apply to          report.                       (a) a spouse or a registered partner in accordance with
                             customary intra-group loan     The scope should be           national law; or
                             transactions which is          limited to natural persons    (b) a child or parent; or
                             particularly common in         whose family relationship     (c) a commercial entity which is directly controlled or
                             cooperative groups where       is very close and clearly     managed by such member, it being provided that intra-group
                             the central body is the        identified and only to        loans are outside the scope of this definition. ª
                             guarantor of the daily         companies whose purpose
                             funding and the solvency of    is commercial and
                             its affiliated institutions in controlled and / or
                             that respect. It would also    managed by the board
                             apply to any legal persons     member.
                             that is related to the         The definition of ìrelated
                             members of the                 partyî suggested conforms
                             management body such as        the rule on the limitation of
                             charities, cooperatives,       directorships set out in
                             associations (a local          article 91 (point 5) of CRD
                                                                          89

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                             football club for instance) IV which focus on
                             although they have nothing  commercial companies.
                             to do with business
                             companies.
Governance                   The EBF is against article  - Half of the Member       Consequently, the EBF proposes either to delete or, at least, to
- Ex-ante                    91(13a) (CRD) of the        States have decided to     amend Article 91(13a) (CRD) of the Parliament report in the
assessment                   Parliament report.          follow the ex-post         following way:
of the                                                   assessment procedure       ì13a. Notwithstanding Article 13(1), competent authorities
members of                                               pursuant to national       may assess institutionsí compliance with the requirements
the                                                      corporate law, when        according to Article 91 (1) to (8) of this Directive regarding the
manageme                                                 implementing CRD IV. The   management body in its supervisory function before or after
nt body in                                               EBA Guidelines on internal the appointment of one of its members in accordance with
its                                                      governance, dated          national law.î
supervisory                                              September 2017 and the
function ñ                                               ECB Guide updated in May
-CRD Art.                                                2018 both recognize the
91(13a)-                                                 ex-post assessment. We
                                                         suggest to keep the
                                                         principle as a matter of
                                                         legal certainty of the
                                                         authorization procedures.
                                                         - An ex ante procedure
                                                         could be incompatible with
                                                         provisions of corporate
                                                         law:
                                                         => The co-optation by the
                                                         board of a new member in
                                                         the event of a replacement
                                                         of a board member given
                                                         the duration of an
                                                                       90

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             assessment and approval
                                             procedure (average 4
                                             months as from the date
                                             on which the supervisor
                                             considers on its own the
                                             file to be complete).
                                             => The sovereignty of the
                                             vote of the general
                                             assembly electing the
                                             board member.
                                             - Ex-ante assessment is not
                                             possible in some Member
                                             states. For example: if the
                                             board approve the draft
                                             resolution in the
                                             perspective of the
                                             shareholders meeting in
                                             February for a nomination
                                             in May by the
                                             shareholders, the
                                             notification file shall be
                                             sent to the regulators in
                                             September at the latest (4
                                             months before February)
                                             which would mean having
                                             the ìgoî decision from a
                                             potential candidate in July
                                             the year before the
                                             nomination which is too
                                             much in advance of the
                                             nomination. One has to
                                             bear in mind the difficulties
                                                          91

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             to find candidates given
                                             the constraints linked to
                                             the limitation of the
                                             number of directorships,
                                             time commitment and
                                             other fit and proper
                                             requirements.
                                             - We cannot ask a
                                             candidate to freeze all his
                                             directorships for such a
                                             long period (i.e. not to
                                             accept new directorships,
                                             resign from directorships).
                                             - How to deal with
                                             potential delay in the
                                             response from the
                                             competent authority?
                                             Experience shows that the
                                             competent authority
                                             continuously asks new
                                             questions and that at the
                                             end of the day the whole
                                             process lasts for a very long
                                             time (from time to time far
                                             beyond the announced 3
                                             months). It is not possible
                                             to postpone the
                                             shareholdersí meeting
                                             once convened (when for
                                             example there is a strict
                                             legal framework to be
                                                          92

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                                             complied with for the
                                             holding of annual general
                                             meetings).
                                             - Because of some Member
                                             states, the regulation
                                             applicable to listed
                                             companies and the
                                             specificities regarding
                                             board members
                                             representing employees,
                                             ex-ante assessment would
                                             not be possible. This is
                                             therefore very important
                                             to keep the possibility to
                                             provide for the ex post
                                             assessment.
                                                           93

      Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
      Other Issues
Issue/Refere      European Council              European Parliament           EBF Position                   EBF Recommendations
nce               Position                      Position
Own funds ñ       The EBF rejects Article 49(1) (CRR) introduced in the       Indeed, this Parliamentís      For the reasons described here, the EBF insists on the importance to
Danish            Parliament report while the Council compromise had          amendment raises the           maintain the current wording of the CRR.
compromise        enabled to adopt a satisfactory wording for Article 18.6(a) following three main issues:
-CRR Art. 49      (CRR).5                                                     - Financial conglomerates may
& 18-                                                                         be required to be granted a
                                                                              new authorisation in 2022 or
                                                                              2023. Any transitional period
                                                                              could probably lead to very
                                                                              dangerous problems of
                                                                              interpretation.
                                                                              - Should the current
                                                                              methodology be replaced by a
                                                                              temporary regime in which
                                                                              the Danish compromise
                                                                              would become the default
                                                                              option without any prior
                                                                              authorisation of the
                                                                              supervisor, this would clearly
                                                                              weaken the current
                                                                              prudential justification.
                                                                              - Lastly, the reference to
                                                                              resolution requirements not
                                                                              aligned with the solvency
                                                                              requirement denies totally
                                                                              the text and the spirit of the
                                                                              Danish compromise.
      5
        The Italian Banking Association does not agree with this position.
                                                                                             94

     Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Outsourcing                 The EBF is in favour of the   However, the outsourcing of    Consequently, the EBF proposes to amend Article 85 (1) (CRD) of the
-CRD Art. 85-               inclusion in the policies and non-critical or important      Parliament report in the following way:
                            processes to evaluate and     functions should be out of the (14)      In Article 85, paragraph (1) is replaced by the following:
                            manage the exposure to        scope of this article.         "1. Competent authorities shall ensure that institutions implement
                            operational risk of risks     Otherwise this would create    policies and processes to evaluate and manage the exposure to
                            resulting from outsourcing    an unmanageable                operational risk, including model risk and risks resulting from
                            (article 85 (1) of the CRD).  administrative burden on the   outsourcing of critical or important functions, and to cover low-
                                                          institutions without adding    frequency high-severity events. Institutions shall articulate what
                                                          any value to the sound         constitutes operational risk for the purposes of those policies and
                                                          management of the exposure     procedures."
                                                          to operational risk.
                                                          Furthermore, due to the high
                                                          number of outsourcing
                                                          arrangements, especially in
                                                          cooperative groups, this could
                                                          lead to an excess of
                                                          information, impeding an
                                                          effective evaluation of the
                                                          most important operational
                                                          risks considering outsourcing
                                                          arrangements.
ADI (Art.                   "(i) they are paid out of     The reference to national      The EBF supports the ECON proposal. The amendment is
52 (1) (l)                  distributable items, or       legislation and, hence, local  necessary for a level-playing-field in Europe in case of
(i) CRR                     reserves built under national accounting standards creates   coupon payments on AT1 Instruments.
                            law;                          differences at European level
                                                          with regard to the treatment
                                                          of AT1 instruments. This gives
                                                          rise to uncertainty to
                                                          investors of AT1 instruments
                                                          and would be an obstacle to
                                                          European harmonisation.
                                                                        95

     Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
Inter-     7. By way of          6a. By way of derogation        From our point of view, the     EBF suggests clarifying that the transition period is meant
mediate    derogation from       from paragraph 1, groups        wording of the Councilís and    for third country groups, by including the words ìthird
EU         paragraph 1,          operating through more than     EPís text is misleading and     countryî.
parent     groups operating      one institution in the Union    should be clarified.
under-     through more than     and with total value of assets                                  7. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, third
taking     one institution in    equal or exceeding EUR 30       Intention of Art. 21b (6a)      country groups operating through more than one
(Art. 21 b the Union and with    billion, or subsidiaries of a   respectively (7) CRD V is to    institution in the Union and with total value of assets
(6a/7)     total value of assets non-EU G-SII, on [date of       establish a transitional period equal to or exceeding EUR 40 billion on [date of entry into
CRD)       equal to or           entry into force of this        of three years for the          force of this directive] shall have an intermediate EU
           exceeding EUR 40      directive] shall have an        establishment of Intermediate   parent undertaking or, in the case referred to in
           billion on [date of   intermediate EU parent          EU Parent Undertakings for      paragraph 1a, two intermediate EU parent undertakings
           entry into force of   undertaking or, in the case     third country groups. Without   by [date of application of Directive + 4 years].
           this directive] shall referred to in paragraph 1a,    the amendment of ìthird
           have an               two intermediate EU parent      countryî the text might later
           intermediate EU       undertakings, by [date of       on be misinterpreted in a way
           parent undertaking    application of this Directive + that would require all groups -
           or, in the case       three years].                   even European - to establish
           referred to in                                        an IPU. However, this was not
           paragraph 1a, two                                     the intention.
           intermediate EU
           parent undertakings
           by [date of
           application of
           Directive + 4
           years].
Support                          Article 101a ëThe creation of a Regulatory reporting
efficiency                       consistent and integrated       requirements have increased
in                               system for collecting           heavily in recent years
regulator                        statistical and prudential      introduced by different
y                                dataí. The EBA shall develop a  authorities. Data points asked
reporting                        consistent and integrated       are often duplicative and
requirem                         system for collecting           overlapping with each other
ents                             statistical and prudential data
                                                                 and the definitions used are
                                 and report its findings to the
                                                                 unclear. We strongly support
                                 Commission no later than [31
                                 December 2019]. The report,     European co-legislators to find
                                                                                96

Annex - EBF Trilogue analysis and advice on RRM prudential issues
                       involving all the competent     ways to improve
                       authorities, as well as         interoperability, efficiency,
                       authorities in charge of        standardization and
                       deposit guarantee schemes,      streamlining of regulatory and
                       statistical authorities, all    statistical reporting
                       relevant authorities, in        requirements and we support
                       particular the ECB and its      co-operation between
                       previous work on statistical
                                                       different authorities, mainly
                       data collections, and taking
                                                       the EBA, ECB and the SRB.
                       into account the previous
                       work that has been conducted
                       with regard to a European
                       Reporting Framework, shall
                       be based on an overall
                       benefits and cost analysis
                       amongst other with regards
                       to the establishment of a
                       central collection point and as
                       a minimum include (see art
                       101a).
                                                                      97

