ECB Guide to the internal
capital adequacy
assessment process
(ICAAP)
  November 2018

Contents
1     Introduction                                                                2
      1.1      Purpose                                                            3
      1.2      Scope and proportionality                                          4
2     Principles                                                                  5
      Principle 1 – The management body is responsible for the sound
      governance of the ICAAP                                                     5
      Principle 2 – The ICAAP is an integral part of the overall management
      framework                                                                   7
      Principle 3 – The ICAAP contributes fundamentally to the continuity of
      the institution by ensuring its capital adequacy from different
      perspectives                                                               12
      Principle 4 – All material risks are identified and taken into account in
      the ICAAP                                                                  25
      Principle 5 – Internal capital is of high quality and clearly defined      29
      Principle 6 – ICAAP risk quantification methodologies are adequate,
      consistent and independently validated                                     31
      Principle 7 – Regular stress testing is aimed at ensuring capital
      adequacy in adverse circumstances                                          35
3     Glossary                                                                   39
Abbreviations                                                                    44
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Contents  1

1 Introduction
  1.   The depth and severity of financial shocks are often amplified by inadequate
       and low quality capital in the banking sector. This was the case in the recent
       financial crisis, when banks were forced to rebuild their capital bases at the
       point when it was most difficult to do so. On the other hand, many risks were
       not appropriately covered by a commensurate amount of capital, owing to
       weaknesses in banks’ risk identification and assessment. 1 It is therefore of
       paramount importance to raise the resilience of individual credit institutions in
       periods of stress by seeking improvements in their forward-looking internal
       capital adequacy assessment processes (ICAAPs), including comprehensive
       stress testing and capital planning.
  2.   Accordingly, the ICAAP plays a key role in the risk management of credit
       institutions. As regards significant institutions established in the Single
       Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the ECB expects the ICAAP in accordance with
       the provisions in Article 73 of the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV) 2 to
       be prudent and conservative 3. The ECB is of the view that sound, effective and
       comprehensive ICAAPs comprise a clear assessment of the risks to capital,
       and have well-structured risk governance and risk escalation processes based
       on a well-thought out and thorough risk strategy that is translated into an
       effective risk limit system.
  3.   In the ECB’s view, a sound, effective and comprehensive ICAAP is based on
       two pillars: the economic and the normative perspectives. Both perspectives are
       expected to complement and inform each other.
  4.   The ICAAP is also an important input factor in the SSM Supervisory Review
       and Evaluation Process (SREP). It feeds into all SREP assessments and into
       the Pillar 2 capital determination process in accordance with the EBA
       Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the SREP 4.
  5.   In the SREP, it is acknowledged that a good ICAAP reduces an institution’s and
       its supervisors’ uncertainty concerning the risks that the institution is or may be
       exposed to, and gives supervisors an increased level of confidence in the
       institution’s ability to continue operating by maintaining adequate capitalisation
  1
     See, for example, The Basel Committee’s response to the financial crisis: report to the G20, Basel
     Committee on Banking Supervision, October 2010.
  2
     Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the
     activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms,
     amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176,
     27.6.2013, p. 338).
  3
     Article 73 CRD IV: “Institutions shall have in place sound, effective and comprehensive strategies and
     processes to assess and maintain on an ongoing basis the amounts, types and distribution of internal
     capital that they consider adequate to cover the nature and level of the risks to which they are or might
     be exposed.”
  4
     See (EBA/GL/2014/13) of 19 July 2018, paragraphs 349-350 and 354. Paragraph 349 says that
     competent authorities “should determine additional own funds requirements on a risk-by-risk basis,
     using supervisory judgment” supported by several sources of information.
  ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Introduction                           2

         and by managing its risks effectively. This requires the institution, in a forward-
         looking manner, to ensure that all material risks are identified, effectively
         managed (using an appropriate combination of quantification and controls) and
         covered by a sufficient amount of high quality capital.
1.1 Purpose
    6.   The purpose of this ECB Guide to the ICAAP (the “Guide”) is to provide
         transparency by making public the ECB’s understanding of the ICAAP
         requirements following from Article 73 CRD IV. The Guide is aimed at assisting
         institutions in strengthening their ICAAPs and at encouraging the use of best
         practices by explaining in greater detail the ECB’s expectations of the ICAAP,
         leading to more consistent and effective supervision.
    7.   The Guide deduces from the CRD IV ICAAP provisions seven principles that
         will be considered, inter alia, in the assessment of each institution’s ICAAP as
         part of the SREP. These principles will also be referred to in discussions with
         individual institutions in the supervisory dialogue.
    8.   The Guide does not substitute or supersede any applicable law implementing
         Article 73 CRD IV. Insofar as the Guide is not in line with applicable law, the
         applicable law prevails. The Guide is intended to be a practical tool that is
         updated regularly to reflect new developments and experience. Consequently,
         the principles and expectations laid out in this Guide will evolve over time. It will
         be reviewed in the light of the ongoing development of European banking
         supervision practice and methodologies, international and European regulatory
         developments and, for example, new authoritative interpretations of relevant
         directives and regulations by the Court of Justice of the European Union.
    9.   This Guide follows a principles-based approach with a focus on selected key
         aspects from a supervisory perspective. It is not meant to provide complete
         guidance on all aspects relevant for sound ICAAPs. The implementation of an
         ICAAP that is adequate for an institution’s particular circumstances remains the
         responsibility of the institution. The ECB assesses institutions’ ICAAPs on a
         case-by-case basis.
    10. In addition to this Guide, and in addition to relevant Union law and national law,
         institutions are encouraged to take into account other ICAAP-relevant
         publications from the EBA 5 and international fora like the Basel Committee on
         Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB).
         Furthermore, institutions should take into account all ICAAP-related
         recommendations addressed to them, e.g. recommendations resulting from the
         SREP, such as those related to sound governance, risk management and
         controls.
    5
       Of particular relevance in this regard are the EBA Guidelines on internal governance
       (EBA/GL/2017/11); the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04); and the CEBS
       Guidelines on the management of concentration risk under the supervisory review process (GL31).
    ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Introduction                 3

1.2 Scope and proportionality
    11. This Guide is relevant for any credit institution that is considered to be a
          significant supervised entity as referred to in Article 2(16) of the SSM
          Framework Regulation 6. The scope of application of Article 73 CRD IV on
          ICAAP scope is determined by Article 108 CRD IV. Given that Article 73 CRD IV
          is a minimum harmonisation provision, and its transposition has been dealt with
          in different ways in different EU Member States, a wide variety of ICAAP
          practices and requirements for the supervision of credit institutions exist across
          participating Member States.
    12. The ECB, together with the national competent authorities (NCAs), has
          developed ICAAP principles. The objective of these principles is to ensure high
          standards of supervision by fostering the development of common
          methodologies in this important supervisory area.
    13. The ICAAP is, above all, an internal process, and it remains the responsibility of
          individual institutions to implement it in a proportionate and credible manner.
          Pursuant to Article 73 CRD IV, ICAAPs have to be proportionate to the nature,
          scale and complexity of the activities of the institution.
    14. The principles developed in this Guide shall only serve as a starting point in
          supervisory dialogues with credit institutions. Therefore, they should not be
          understood as comprehensively covering all aspects necessary to implement
          and use a sound, effective and comprehensive ICAAP. It is the responsibility of
          the institution to ensure that its ICAAP remains comprehensive and
          proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of its activities, bearing in
          mind that proportionality is not to be applied in a way that undermines the
          effectiveness of its ICAAP.
    6
       Regulation (EU) No 468/2014 of the European Central Bank of 16 April 2014 establishing the
       framework for cooperation within the Single Supervisory Mechanism between the European Central
       Bank and national competent authorities and with national designated authorities (SSM Framework
       Regulation) (ECB/2014/17) (OJ L 141, 14.5.2014, p. 1).
    ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Introduction               4

2 Principles
  Principle 1 – The management body is responsible for
  the sound governance of the ICAAP
  (i)    In view of the major role of the ICAAP for the institution, all of its key elements
         are expected to be approved by the management body. This is expected to be
         reflected in the internal governance arrangements for the management body,
         set up in accordance with national regulations and in line with relevant Union
         law and EBA guidelines. The management body, senior management and
         relevant committees are expected to discuss and challenge the ICAAP in an
         effective way.
  (ii)   Each year, the management body is expected to provide its assessment of the
         capital adequacy of the institution, supported by ICAAP outcomes and any
         other relevant information, by producing and signing a clear and concise
         statement, the capital adequacy statement (CAS).
  (iii) The management body has overall responsibility for the implementation of the
         ICAAP, and it is expected to approve an ICAAP governance framework with a
         clear and transparent assignment of responsibilities, adhering to the
         segregation of functions. The governance framework is expected to include a
         clear approach to the regular internal review and validation of the ICAAP.
  The management body approves key elements of the ICAAP
  15. The management body is expected to produce and sign the CAS, and approve
         the key elements of the ICAAP, for example:
         •     the governance framework;
         •     the internal documentation framework;
         •     the perimeter of entities captured, the risk identification process, and the
               internal risk inventory and taxonomy, reflecting the scope of material risks
               as well as the coverage of those risks by capital;
         •     risk quantification methodologies 7, including high-level risk measurement
               assumptions and parameters (e.g. time horizon, diversification
               assumptions, confidence levels), supported by reliable data and sound
               data aggregation systems;
  7
       The ICAAP Guide does not prescribe a particular methodology for quantifying risks. This is explained in
       more detail in the section on “Choice of risk quantification methodologies” under Principle 6.
  ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                         5

     •      the approach used to assess capital adequacy (including the stress-testing
            framework and a well-articulated definition of capital adequacy).
16. The management body comprises a supervisory function and a management
     function that may be performed by a single body or two separate bodies. Which
     key elements of the ICAAP are approved by which function depends on the
     internal governance arrangements of the institution. This will be interpreted by
     the ECB in accordance with national regulations and in line with relevant Union
     law and EBA guidelines 8.
Internal review and validation
17. According to Article 73 CRD IV, the ICAAP “shall be subject to regular internal
     review”. This regular internal review is expected by the ECB to cover both
     qualitative and quantitative aspects, including, for example, the use of ICAAP
     outcomes, the stress-testing framework, risk capture and the data aggregation
     process, including proportionate validation processes for the internal risk
     quantification methodologies used.
18. For this purpose, the institution is expected to have in place adequate policies
     and processes for internal reviews. The reviews are expected to be conducted
     by the three lines of defence, consisting of the business lines and the
     independent internal control functions (risk management, compliance and
     internal audit), in accordance with their respective roles and responsibilities 9.
19. The ECB expects a defined process to be in place in order to ensure proactive
     adjustment of the ICAAP to any material changes that occur, such as entering
     new markets, providing new services, offering new products, or changes in the
     structure of the group 10 or financial conglomerate.
20. ICAAP outcomes and assumptions are expected to be subject to adequate
     internal review, covering, for example, capital planning, scenarios, and risk
     quantification. The extent to which this challenge is expected to be quantitative
     as opposed to qualitative depends on the nature of the element assessed. This
     review is expected to take due account of the limits and constraints arising from
     the methodologies employed, the underlying assumptions and the input data
     used in quantifying the risk.
21. The purpose of the review is to scrutinise whether the internal processes,
     chosen methodologies and assumptions have led to sound outcomes (“back-
     testing”) and whether they remain appropriate with a view to the current
     situation and future developments. The outcome of this review is expected to be
8
   See recital 56 and points (7) to (9) of Article 3(1) CRD IV and Title II of the EBA Guidelines on internal
   governance (EBA/GL/2017/11).
9
   The respective roles of the functions involved are described in the EBA Guidelines on internal
   governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) .
10
   For the purpose of this Guide, the term “institution” also refers to groups, conglomerates or sub-groups,
   as applicable in accordance with Article 108 CRD IV.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                            6

       thoroughly assessed, documented and reported to senior management and the
       management body. In case any weaknesses have been identified, effective
       follow-up actions are expected to lead to a quick rectification of the findings.
Capital adequacy statement
22. In the capital adequacy statement (CAS), the management body provides its
       assessment of the capital adequacy of the institution and explains its main
       supporting arguments, backed by information it considers relevant, including
       ICAAP outcomes. The ECB is of the view that a sound CAS demonstrates that
       the management body has a good understanding of the capital adequacy of the
       entity, its main drivers and vulnerabilities, the main ICAAP inputs and outputs,
       the parameters and processes underlying the ICAAP, and the coherence of the
       ICAAP with its strategic plans.
23. The authority to sign the CAS on behalf of the management body is expected to
       be decided by the institution in the light of national regulations and relevant
       prudential requirements and guidelines 11.
Principle 2 – The ICAAP is an integral part of the overall
management framework
(i)    Pursuant to Article 73 CRD IV, the institution is expected to have in place
       sound, effective and comprehensive strategies and processes to assess and
       maintain capital that it considers adequate to cover the nature and level of the
       risks to which it is or might be exposed.
(ii)   In addition to an adequate quantitative framework for assessing capital
       adequacy, a qualitative framework needs to ensure that capital adequacy is
       actively managed. This includes the monitoring of capital adequacy indicators to
       identify and assess potential threats in a timely manner, drawing practical
       conclusions and taking preventive action to ensure that both own funds and
       internal capital remain adequate 12.
(iii) The quantitative and qualitative aspects of the ICAAP are expected to be
       consistent with each other and with the institution’s business strategy and risk
       appetite. The ICAAP is expected to be integrated into the business, decision-
       making and risk management processes of the institution. The ICAAP is
       expected to be consistent and coherent throughout the group.
11
     The EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) describe in more detail the allocation of
     tasks and responsibilities between the supervisory and management functions of the management
     body.
12
     For a description of the internal capital concept, see Principle 5.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      7

(iv) Institutions are expected to maintain a sound and effective overall ICAAP
      architecture and documentation on the interplay between the ICAAP elements
      and the integration of the ICAAP into the institution’s overall management
      framework.
(v)   The ICAAP is expected to support strategic decision-making and, at the same
      time, be operationally aimed at ensuring that the institution maintains adequate
      capitalisation on an ongoing basis, thereby promoting an appropriate
      relationship between risks and rewards. All methods and processes used by the
      institution to steer its capital adequacy, as part of the operational or strategic
      capital adequacy management process, are expected to be approved,
      thoroughly reviewed, and properly included in the ICAAP and its
      documentation.
The ICAAP as an integral part of an institution’s management
framework
24. In order to assess and maintain adequate capital to cover the institution’s
      risks, 13 the internal processes and arrangements are expected to ensure that
      quantitative analysis of risks, as reflected in the ICAAP, is integrated into all
      material business activities and decisions.
25. This integration may be achieved by using the ICAAP for, for example, the
      strategic planning process at group level, monitoring capital adequacy
      indicators to identify and assess potential threats in a timely manner, drawing
      practical conclusions and taking preventive action, determining capital
      allocation, and ensuring the ongoing effectiveness of the risk appetite
      framework (RAF).
26. ICAAP-based risk-adjusted performance indicators 14 are expected to be used in
      the decision-making process and, for example, when determining variable
      remuneration or when discussing business and risks at all levels of the
      institution, including, inter alia, in asset and liability management committees,
      risk committees and meetings of the management body.-
The overall ICAAP architecture
27. The management body is responsible for maintaining a sound and effective
      overall ICAAP architecture, ensuring that the different elements of the ICAAP fit
      coherently together and that the ICAAP is an integral part of the institution’s
      overall management framework. The institution is expected to have a clear view
13
    The general expectations regarding the quantitative part of the ICAAP are introduced under Principle 3.
14
    Examples of such indicators can be found in the EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration policies under
    Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and disclosures under Article 450 of Regulation (EU)
    No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2015/22)
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                        8

      of how these elements are consistently integrated into an effective overall
      process that allows it to maintain capital adequacy over time.
28. For this purpose, the institution is expected to maintain, as part of its ICAAP
      documentation, a description of the overall ICAAP architecture, for example an
      overview of the key elements of the ICAAP and how they work together,
      explaining how the ICAAP is integrated into the institution’s functioning and how
      its outcomes are used in the institution. This ICAAP architecture description is
      expected to explain the high-level structure of the ICAAP, how its outcomes are
      used in decision-making, and the connections between, for example, business
      and risk strategies, capital plans, risk identification processes, the risk appetite
      statement, limit systems, risk quantification methodologies, the stress-testing
      programme, and management reporting.
Management reporting
29. The ICAAP is an ongoing process. The institution is expected to integrate
      ICAAP outcomes (such as how material risks, key indicators, etc. are evolving)
      into its internal reporting to different managerial levels at appropriate
      frequencies. The frequency of reporting to the management body is expected to
      be at least quarterly, but, depending on the size, complexity, business model
      and risk types of the institution, reporting might need to be more frequent to
      ensure timely management action.
30. The ICAAP outcomes for risk quantification and capital allocation, when
      approved, are expected to become a key performance benchmark and target
      against which each risk-taking division’s financial and other outcomes are
      measured. This is expected to be supported by the implementation of a sound
      ICAAP governance framework and architecture as described under Principle 1.
The ICAAP and the risk appetite framework 15
31. The RAF of the institution is expected to formalise the interplay between the
      RAF and other strategic processes, such as the ICAAP, the ILAAP, the recovery
      plan and the remuneration framework, in accordance with the SSM supervisory
      statement on governance and risk appetite. A well-developed RAF, articulated
      through the risk appetite statement, is expected to be closely interlinked with
      the ICAAP and a cornerstone of sound risk and capital management.
32. In its risk appetite statement, the institution is expected to set out both a clear
      and unambiguous view on and intended actions with regard to its risks in line
15
   Further explanations and guidance can be found in the SSM supervisory statement on governance and
   risk appetite, ECB, June 2016 and in the Principles for An Effective Risk Appetite Framework, Financial
   Stability Board, November 2013.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      9

     with its business strategy. In particular, the statement is expected to include
     motivations for taking on or avoiding certain types of risks, products or regions.
33. The institution’s overall risk profile is expected to ultimately be constrained and
     driven by the group-wide RAF and its implementation. Furthermore, the RAF is
     a critical element of the institution’s strategy development and implementation
     process. In a structured manner, the RAF links risks taken to the institution’s
     capital adequacy and strategic objectives. As part of the RAF, the institution is
     expected to determine and take into account its management buffers.
34. The institution is expected to clearly express how the implementation and
     monitoring of its strategy and risk appetite are supported by its ICAAP, and how
     this effectively enables it to comply with the agreed risk boundaries set out in
     the risk appetite statement. In order to facilitate sound and effective risk
     management, the institution is expected to use the ICAAP outcomes when
     setting up an effective risk monitoring and reporting system and an adequately
     granular limit system (including effective escalation procedures) that allocates
     specific limits to, for example, individual risks, sub-risks, entities and business
     areas, which helps operationalise the risk appetite statement of the group.
Consistency between ICAAPs and recovery plans
35. A recovery plan aims at providing measures to be taken by the institution to
     restore its financial position following a significant deterioration. Since
     insufficient capitalisation is one of the key threats to business continuity/viability,
     the ICAAP and the recovery plan are expected to be parts of the same risk
     management continuum. While the ICAAP is aimed at maintaining the
     continuity of an institution (within its strategy and intended business model),
     recovery plans set out measures (including extraordinary measures) to restore
     its financial position following a significant deterioration.
36. Accordingly, institutions are expected to ensure consistency and coherence
     between their ICAAPs, on the one hand, and their recovery plans and
     arrangements (e.g. thresholds for early warning signals and recovery indicators,
     escalation procedures, and potential management actions 16) on the other.
     Moreover, potential ICAAP management actions with material impact are
     expected to be reflected without delay in the recovery plan, and vice versa, to
     ensure that the processes and the information included in related documents
     are consistent and up to date.
16
   However, where there are differences in the principles underlying the ICAAP and recovery planning, the
   envisaged management actions may be different.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                    10

Consistency and coherence across groups
37. The ICAAP is expected to ensure capital adequacy at relevant levels of
      consolidation and for applicable entities of the group, as required by Article 108
      CRD IV. In order to be able to effectively assess and maintain capital adequacy
      across entities, the strategies, risk management processes decision-making
      and the methodologies and assumptions applied when quantifying capital need
      to be coherent across the relevant perimeter.
38. Where national ICAAP provisions or guidance differ for certain entities or sub-
      groups, their implementation on those levels of the group or sub-group may
      require diverging approaches to a certain degree. However, institutions are
      expected to ensure that this does not interfere with the effectiveness and
      consistency of the ICAAP on each relevant level, with a special focus on the
      group level. The institution is also expected to assess possible impediments to
      capital transferability within the group in a conservative and prudent manner
      and take them into account in its ICAAP.
Example 2.1:
Consistency between the ICAAP and the recovery plan
To ensure the overall consistency of recovery and ICAAP arrangements, institutions
are expected to be consistent across the continuum of potential capital impacts and
corresponding management actions in their ICAAPs and their recovery plans. More
specifically, this means, for example, that capital indicators used in the recovery plan
for identifying significant actual and likely future deteriorations in the quantity and
quality of capital are expected to be consistently taken into account in the ICAAP.
More specifically, under normal circumstances capital levels are expected to be
managed via the ICAAP so as to stay above the thresholds for capital indicators 17 in
the recovery plan by a prudent margin.
Likewise, the management actions in the ICAAP and the recovery plan are also
expected to be consistent: where an institution assumes similar actions in its
recovery plan and its ICAAP, this could lead to an overestimation of the effectiveness
of recovery options in the calculation of the overall recovery capacity if some of them
have already been used under the ICAAP. Therefore, in order to avoid overlaps
between recovery options and ICAAP management actions, which might lead to
“double-counting”, material management actions taken under the ICAAP are
expected to be reflected without delay in a re-assessment of the feasibility and
effectiveness of the recovery options included in the recovery plan. 18
For instance, the capacity of an institution to raise capital in a recovery situation may
be severely affected if the institution has already raised capital under its ICAAP in a
situation that does not fall under the recovery plan. This could impact the types and
17
    More details on this can be found in the EBA Guidelines on the minimum list of qualitative and
    quantitative recovery plan indicators (EBA/GL/2015/02).
18
    See also the ECB Report on recovery plans, July 2018, for more details.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                 11

volume of extra capital that could be raised as well as the specification of issuance
conditions. Another example are management actions related to the reduction of risk.
For instance if certain assets are sold under the ICAAP in a situation that is not a
recovery situation, then those assets cannot be sold again later, i.e. this action
cannot be a feasible recovery option anymore.
Another connection between ICAAPs and recovery plans is reverse stress testing.
This instrument is expected to be used by institutions as part of their ICAAPs to
assess which scenarios would bring them into a situation that would threaten their
ability to pursue their intended business model (and therefore their ICAAP
objectives). In the context of recovery planning, “reverse stress testing should be
considered as a starting point for developing scenarios that should be only ‘near-
default’; i.e. they would lead to an institution’s or a group’s business model becoming
non-viable unless the recovery actions were successfully implemented.” 19 Moreover,
scenarios in both ICAAPs and recovery plans should be based on events that are
particularly relevant to the institutions and address their key vulnerabilities.
Principle 3 – The ICAAP contributes fundamentally to the
continuity of the institution by ensuring its capital
adequacy from different perspectives
(i)    The ICAAP plays a key role in maintaining the continuity of the institution by
       ensuring its adequate capitalisation. In order to ensure this contribution to its
       continuity, the institution is expected to implement a proportionate ICAAP that is
       prudent and conservative and integrates two complementary internal
       perspectives.
(ii)   The institution is expected to implement a normative perspective, which is a
       multi-year assessment of the institution’s ability to fulfil all of its capital-related
       regulatory and supervisory requirements and demands and to cope with other
       external financial constraints on an ongoing basis over the medium term. This
       includes the assessment of a credible baseline scenario and adequate,
       institution-specific adverse scenarios, as reflected in the multi-year capital
       planning and in line with the overall planning objectives of the institution.
(iii) The normative perspective is expected to be complemented by an economic
       perspective, under which the institution is expected to identify and quantify all
       material risks that may cause economic losses and deplete internal capital. In
       accordance with this economic perspective, the institution is expected to ensure
       that its risks are adequately covered by internal capital in line with its internal
       capital adequacy concept.
(iv) Both perspectives are expected to mutually inform each other and be integrated
       into all material business activities and decisions as outlined under Principle 2.
19
     See paragraph 11 of the EBA Guidelines on the range of scenarios to be used in recovery plans
     (EBA/GL/2014/06).
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                 12

Objective: to contribute to the continuity of the institution
39. The objective of the ICAAP is to contribute to the institution’s continuity from a
     capital perspective by ensuring that it has sufficient capital to bear its risks,
     absorb losses and follow a sustainable strategy, even during a prolonged period
     of adverse developments. The institution is expected to reflect this continuity
     objective in its RAF (as specified under Principle 2) and to use the ICAAP
     framework to reassess its risk appetite and tolerance thresholds within its
     overall capital constraints, taking into account its risk profile and vulnerabilities.
40. Within these capital constraints, the institution is expected to assess and
     define 20 management buffers above the regulatory and supervisory minima 21
     and internal capital needs that allow it to sustainably follow its strategy. When
     aiming for sufficient management buffers over the medium-term horizon, the
     institution is expected to take into account, for example, the expectations of
     markets, investors and counterparties, possible restrictions on distributions
     stemming from the maximum distributable amount (MDA), and the reliance of
     the business model on the ability to pay out bonuses, dividends and payments
     on Additional Tier 1 (AT1) instruments. In addition to such external constraints,
     the management buffers are expected, for example, to cushion uncertainties
     around projections of, and possible resulting fluctuations in, capital ratios, to
     reflect the institution’s risk appetite and to allow it some flexibility in its business
     decisions.
20
   In this Guide, management buffers do not refer to available capital (“headroom”). Rather, they reflect
   the institution’s view on the capital it needs to sustainably follow its business model.
21
   The management buffer concept does not actually set new minimum capital requirements above the
   existing legal minima. Although it is generally expected that management buffers will be larger than
   zero, in theory an institution may also be able to argue that, depending on the scenario assessed, a
   management buffer of zero would still allow it to sustainably follow its business model.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                       13

Figure 1
The ICAAP contributes to the continuity of the institution
  Economic environment
                                                           Adequate
                                                            capital
                                                           (ICAAP)
  Business strategy                            CONTINUITY OF THE INSTITUTION   Competitive position
                                                           Adequate
                                                            liquidity
                                                            (ILAAP)
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
Normative internal perspective
41. The normative perspective is a multi-year assessment of the institution’s ability
        to fulfil all of its capital-related quantitative regulatory and supervisory
        requirements and demands, and to cope with other external financial
        constraints, on an ongoing basis.
42. In addition to requirements such as those on the leverage ratio, large exposures
        as well as – once applicable – the minimum level of eligible liabilities (MREL),
        the institution is expected to take into account, in particular, Pillar 1 and Pillar 2
        capital requirements, the CRD IV buffer framework and the Pillar 2 capital
        guidance, as illustrated in Figure 2.
43. The normative perspective is expected to take into account all material risks
        affecting the relevant regulatory ratios, including own funds and risk exposure
        amounts, over the planning period. Therefore, although its outcomes are
        expressed in regulatory metrics, the normative perspective is not limited to the
        Pillar 1 risks recognised by the regulatory capital requirements. When
        assessing its capital adequacy under the normative perspective, the institution
        is expected to take into account all relevant risks it has quantified under the
        economic perspective and assess if and to what extent those risks may
        materialise over the planning period, depending on the scenarios applied.
44. The institution is expected to maintain a robust, up-to-date capital plan that is
        compatible with its strategies, risk appetite and capital resources. The capital
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles               14

      plan is expected to comprise baseline and adverse scenarios and to cover a
      forward-looking horizon of at least three years 22. The institution is also expected
      to take into account the impact of upcoming changes in legal, regulatory, and
      accounting frameworks 23 and make an informed and reasoned decision on how
      to address them in the capital planning. Regarding the future levels of P2R and
      P2G, institutions are expected to take into account all information about future
      changes in these positions. 24
22
   It is the responsibility of the institution to choose an adequate planning horizon – three years is the
   minimum horizon a detailed capital plan is expected to capture. Institutions are also expected to take
   developments beyond this minimum horizon into account in their strategic planning, in a proportionate
   manner, if they will have a material impact.
23
   Depending on the likelihood and potential impact of particular changes, different treatment may be
   applied by the institution. For instance, some changes may seem highly unlikely, but would have such a
   huge impact on the institution that it is expected to prepare contingency measures. Other, more likely
   regulatory changes, however, are expected to be captured in the capital plan itself. Recent examples of
   new regulations are International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9), the Bank Recovery and
   Resolution Directive (BRRD), and the standardised approach to counterparty credit risk (SA-CCR).
24
   P2R and P2G levels are set by the ECB. In their capital planning, institutions are expected to treat
   these capital needs as externally determined figures. In the absence of specific information to the
   contrary, the future P2R and P2G used in capital planning are expected to be at least as high as the
   current levels.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                         15

Figure 2
Management buffers and other capital constraints under the normative perspective
  Baseline scenarios:
  3 year projections                                              Management buffer
                                                                   above the P2G
                                                   Pillar 2          Baseline minimum
  MDA trigger                                     guidance
                                      Combined buffer requirement
                                                   Pillar 2
             OCR
                                                requirement
                                                                    TSCR
                                                   Pillar 1
                                                requirement
                                            Own funds demand                           Own funds
                                                                                        supply
  Adverse scenarios:
  3 year projections
                                                   Pillar 2
  MDA trigger                                    Guidance
                                                                     Management buffer
                                                                      above the TSCR
                                                                    Absolute minimum
                                                   Pillar 2
             OCR
                                                requirement
                                                                   TSCR
                                                   Pillar 1
                                                requirement
                                            Own funds demand                           Own funds
                                                                                        supply
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
45. For non-stressed considerations, including baseline projections in capital plans,
        the institution is expected, in addition to the total SREP capital requirement
        (TSCR), to account for its combined buffer requirement (CBR), i.e. the overall
        capital requirement (OCR), and the Pillar 2 guidance (P2G). The institution is
        expected to take the above into account to determine appropriate management
        buffers and implement capital plans that allow it to comply with the OCR plus
        the P2G over the medium term under expected baseline conditions (see
        Figure 3).
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles               16

Figure 3
Baseline capital ratio projection under the normative perspective
    OCR
    P2G
    Management buffer
    Baseline minimum
    Baseline scenario (outcome)
                                                        Management buffer
                                                               P2G
                                                               OCR
                                                       (= P1R + P2R + CBR)
              t=0                                t+1                       t+2    t+3
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
46. The institution is expected to aim to meet its TSCR at all times, including under
        prolonged periods of adverse developments that imply a serious CET1
        depletion. In sufficiently adverse scenarios 25, it might be acceptable for the
        institution not to meet its P2G and combined buffer requirements. However, the
        institution is expected to determine adequate management buffers on top of the
        TSCR to take into account the above considerations, and implement them in
        capital plans. This would allow it to stay above its TSCR and to fulfil, for
        example, market expectations even under adverse conditions over the medium-
        term horizon (see Figure 4).
47. If the institution assumes management actions in its capital plan, it is expected
        to also assess the feasibility and the expected impact of such actions under the
        respective scenarios, and it is expected to be transparent about the quantitative
        impact of each action on projected figures. Where relevant, the assumptions
        used are expected to be consistent with the recovery plan.
25
     The severity of adverse scenarios is further elaborated under Principle 7.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles      17

Figure 4
Adverse capital ratio projections under the normative perspective 26
    TSCR
    Management buffer
    Baseline scenario (outcome)
    Adverse scenario 1 (outcome)
    Adverse scenario 2 (outcome)
    Adverse scenario n (outcome)
    Adverse minimum
                                                        Management buffer
                                                              TSCR
                                                           (=P1R + P2R)
              t=0                                t+1                      t+2                    t+3
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
Economic internal perspective
48. The institution is expected to manage its capital adequacy from the economic
        perspective by ensuring that its risks are adequately covered by internal capital,
        taking into account the expectations of Principle 5. Economic capital adequacy
        requires the internal capital of the institution to be sufficient to cover its risks
        and support its strategy on an ongoing basis.
49. Under this perspective, the institution’s assessment is expected to cover the full
        universe of risks that may have a material impact on its capital position from an
        economic perspective. In order to capture the undisguised economic situation,
        this perspective is not based on accounting or regulatory provisions. Rather, it
        should take into account economic value considerations 27 for all economically
        relevant aspects, including assets, liabilities and risks. 28Thus, although the
        ICAAP is based on the assumption of – and aimed at ensuring – the continuity
        of the institution, the institution is expected to manage its economic capital
        adequacy on the basis of economic value considerations. The institution is
26
     For the purposes of illustration, the same management buffer is shown for all scenarios although the
     actual management buffer depends on the scenario assessed.
27
     See the glossary for further information on this concept. For internal capital, details are spelled out in
     Principle 5; regarding risks, institutions are expected to take into account anything that could impact
     their economic value, i.e. their internal capital. More details on the ECB expectations regarding risk
     identification, risk quantification and stress testing under the economic perspective are spelled out in
     Principles 4, 6 and 7.
28
     The concept of economic capital adequacy, including, for example, the net present value concept, is
     subject to an institution’s own definition and criteria. While the concept underlying this perspective is
     expected to be in line with the “economic value” concept described in the EBA Guidelines on the
     management of interest rate risk arising from non-trading book activities (EBA/GL/2018/02) (also
     referred to as interest rate risk in the banking book, or IRRBB), this Guide does not stipulate the use of
     any specific methodology to quantify the risks or the internal capital.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                             18

     expected to manage economic risks and internal capital adequately, and
     assess them as part of its stress-testing framework and its monitoring and
     management of capital adequacy.
50. The institution is expected to use its own processes and methodologies to
     identify, quantify, and set aside internal capital against the expected losses (as
     far as these are not considered in the determination of internal capital) and
     unexpected losses that it might be subject to, taking into account the principle of
     proportionality. The institution is expected to perform a point-in-time risk
     quantification of the current situation as at the reference date. This is expected
     to be complemented by a medium-term assessment of the impact of material
     future developments that are not incorporated in the assessment of the current
     situation, e.g. potential management actions, changes in the risk profile or in the
     external environment 29.
51. The institution is expected to use the outcomes and metrics of the economic
     capital adequacy assessment in its strategic and operational management and
     when reviewing its risk appetite and business strategies. In addition to prudent
     internal capital definition 30 and risk quantification, the institution is expected to
     present an economic capital adequacy concept that enables it to remain
     economically viable and follow its strategy. This includes management
     processes to identify in a timely manner the need for action to overcome
     emerging internal capital deficiencies and to take effective measures
     (e.g. capital increase, risk reduction).
52. The economic capital adequacy of the institution requires active monitoring and
     management. For this reason, the institution is expected to prepare and plan
     procedures and management actions to be taken to address situations that
     would lead to insufficient capitalisation.
29
   Management actions include, inter alia, capital measures, acquisitions or sales of business lines, and
   changes in the risk profile. See also the section on “Interaction between the economic and normative
   perspectives”.
30
   Expectations regarding internal capital are introduced under Principle 5.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      19

Figure 5
Management considerations under the economic perspective
     Observed internal capital level
     (coverage of risks)
                                  - Actions to reverse the trend and
                                    maintain capital adequacy
    "Downward trend
      identified"
                                                                                                                  Economic capital
                                                                                                                adequacy threshold
                                                           "Capital adequacy
                                                          severely questioned"
                                                                               - Actions to restore capital adequacy
                                                                               - Review of the strategy and risk appetite
                                                                 Time
It is important to note that the graph is not expected to be understood as a projection of a point-in-time economic situation. It depicts
the deterioration of economic capital levels that may occur over time beyond normal business cycle developments. The institution is
expected to have a strategy for addressing such deteriorations and it is expected to actively manage capital adequacy. In addition, the
quantifications of risks and available internal capital are expected to feed into the projections under the normative perspective.
53. When the institution identifies a significant downward trend in its economic
         capital position, it is expected to consider measures to maintain adequate
         capitalisation, reverse the trend, and review its strategy and risk appetite, as
         indicatively illustrated in Figure 5. Accordingly, when the institution falls below
         its internal capital adequacy threshold, it is expected to be able to take
         necessary measures and explain how the capital adequacy will be ensured over
         the medium term.
Interaction between the economic and normative perspectives
54. Under the economic perspective, economic risks and losses affect internal
         capital immediately and to their full extent. Hence, the economic perspective
         gives a very comprehensive view of risks 31. Some of those risks, or risks related
         to them, may also partially or fully materialise later under the normative
         perspective via accounting losses, own funds reductions or prudential
         provisions.
55. Therefore, the institution is expected to assess under the normative perspective
         the extent to which the risks identified and quantified under the economic
         perspective may impact its own funds and total risk exposure amount (TREA) in
         the future. Hence, the projections of the future capital position under the
         normative perspective are expected to be duly informed by the economic
         perspective assessments.
31
       For example, a negative impact of IRRBB on economic value (i.e. the change in the present value of
       the institution’s expected net cash flows) provides a view of the potential long-term effects on an
       institution’s overall exposures. Under the normative perspective, this risk may materialise through, for
       example, a decrease in earnings or a transaction concerning the respective portfolio.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                                                      20

56. More specifically, risks and impacts that are not necessarily apparent when
      focusing solely on the accounting/regulatory capital framework, but could
      materialise and affect future regulatory own funds or the TREA, are expected to
      be considered.
57. Conversely, the institution is also expected to use the outcomes of the
      normative perspective to inform 32 the economic perspective risk quantifications
      and adjust or complement the latter if they do not adequately capture the risks
      arising from the adverse scenario(s) considered. Thus, the normative and
      economic perspectives are expected to mutually inform each other.
58. Since the capital definitions and levels, the risk types and their amounts, and
      the minimum capital ratios usually differ between the two perspectives, and
      since – over time and across institutions – one is not systematically more
      stringent than the other, effective risk management requires the implementation
      of both perspectives. 33
32
   This is particularly relevant for risks that are more difficult to quantify. Adjustments to the risk
   quantification in the economic perspective are expected to be fully justified and documented.
33
   The general reasoning behind this is the same as that set out for IRRBB in the EBA Guidelines on the
   management of interest rate risk arising from non-trading book activities (EBA/GL/2018/02):
   “Institutions should measure their exposure to IRRBB in terms of potential changes to both the
   economic value (EV) and earnings. Institutions should use complementary features of both approaches
   to capture the complex nature of IRRBB over the short-term and long-term time horizons.”
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      21

Figure 6
Overview of ICAAP perspectives and key features
                                                          ICAAP
                                       Aimed at maintaining the capital adequacy on
                                       an ongoing basis over the medium term from
                                         two complementary internal perspectives.
  Normative internal perspective                                          Economic internal perspective
  • Ongoing fulfilment of all relevant                                    • Risks that may cause economic losses
    regulatory requirements and external                                    are covered by internal capital.
    constraints.
                                                                          • Capital adequacy concept based on
  • Medium-term projections for at least three                              economic value considerations (e.g. net
    years:                                                                  present value approach).
    • Ensures the ongoing fulfilment of OCR                               • Internal definition of capital.
      plus P2G in the baseline, and TSCR in
                                                                          • Point-in-time risk quantification of the
      adverse scenarios.
                                                                            current situation feeding into a medium-
    • Takes into account all material risks                                 term assessment covering future
      (not limited to Pillar 1 risks).             Mutual information       developments.
    • Considers upcoming changes in the                                   • Adequate and consistent internal risk
      legal / regulatory / accounting                                       quantification methods.
      frameworks.
                                                                          • Internal indicators, thresholds and
  • Adequate and consistent internal                                        management buffers.
    methods for quantifying impacts on Pillar
    1 ratios.
  • Additional management buffers
    determined by the institution.
  • Sound governance                                         • Sound data quality, data aggregation and IT
                                                               architecture
  • Integration in decision-making, strategies and risk      • Subject to regular internal review, including
    management                                                 independent validation
Example 3.1:
Management buffers
The weaker the capital base of an institution is, the harder and more expensive it
becomes for it to follow its intended business model. For example, if lower capital
levels are perceived by investors, counterparties and customers as increasing the
default risk of the institution, they will demand higher risk premia. This will negatively
affect the institution’s profitability, potentially threatening its continuity, even though
its capital levels are still above regulatory and supervisory minima.
Another example is dividends and AT1 payments. If the institution’s strategy is based
on the issuance of capital instruments in the capital market, lower capital levels may
lead to lower investor confidence. This may impede the institution’s capital market
access and, consequently, its ability to pursue its business strategy.
Taking such considerations into account, the institution is expected to determine the
levels of capital it needs in order to continue its operations. In its capital planning, the
institution is expected to ensure that it can maintain its management buffers under
both baseline and adverse conditions. Management buffers can vary greatly from
institution to institution and they depend on external developments, as reflected in
different scenarios. For example, it may make a difference if an adverse scenario
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                                   22

reflects market-wide or idiosyncratic stress, because this aspect may impact the
expectations of investors, customers, counterparts, etc. with regard to the
capitalisation of the institution. Furthermore, management buffers may vary over time
even within a scenario, as different points in time reflect different external and
internal conditions.
Example 3.2:
The economic perspective informs the normative perspective
The institution is expected to quantify the profit and loss (P&L) impact of interest rate
risks in the banking book under the normative perspective, even though they are not
considered in Pillar 1 capital requirements. While the economic impact of interest
rate changes for banking book positions is immediately visible to the full extent under
the economic perspective, it can take several years for the full impact of P&L effects
on Pillar 1 capital ratios to show under the normative perspective. Consequently, the
institution is expected to consider potential losses stemming from all risks that are
captured by the economic perspective, including risks not considered by Pillar 1, in
the normative perspective, in particular in the adverse scenario projections.
As an illustrative example, the institution might come to the conclusion in its
economic perspective that its economic value would decline by €100 million over the
next year if interest rates were to increase by 200 basis points. In its normative
perspective scenarios, it would then be expected to assess the respective impact on
its P&L and, ultimately, on its own funds and Pillar 1 ratio over the capital planning
horizon, e.g. via a P&L decrease of €15 million in the first year, €13 million in the
second and €10 million in the third.
Another example is hidden losses. While assets are conceptually taken into account
at economic value/net present value under the economic perspective, the normative
perspective is based on accounting and prudential values. Hidden losses become
apparent when comparing accounting values and economic values. Having
determined the total volume of hidden losses, the institution needs to decide the
extent to which those hidden losses may also materialise in the balance sheet/P&L
account, and this is expected to be taken into account in the normative perspective.
If, for example, an institution has a government bond portfolio that is subject to total
hidden losses of €100 million, it is expected to determine what part of those hidden
losses would affect its projected regulatory own funds, subject to the respective
underlying medium-term scenarios. In this example, the institution may conclude that
accounting losses of €10 and €20 million would occur in years 1 and 2, respectively,
owing to haircuts on the nominal value of the underlying bonds. These losses would
need to be taken into account in the projections produced under the normative
perspective.
Another example is credit migration risk. In the economic perspective, the institution
assesses to what extent its economic value would decline over the next year if the
creditworthiness of its credit exposures were to deteriorate, i.e. migrate to higher
default probabilities. Although such a deterioration would not feed into the normative
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles     23

perspective via the P&L (as opposed to credit default risk) for credit exposures that
are not accounted for at fair value (e.g. in the loans and receivables category), it
could nonetheless have an impact: the higher default probabilities identified in the
economic perspective lead to higher risk-weighted assets, thus to lower Pillar 1
ratios in the capital planning projections. This translation from the economic into the
normative perspective is usually not a one-to-one usage of the economic perspective
figure. Rather, the institution should assess the amount of the TREA increase in the
respective scenario, subject to the Pillar 1 credit risk approach applied by the
institution and applying Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) provisions on how
the risk-weighted assets depend on Probabilities of Default (PDs), LGDs and EADs.
To sum up, there are several channels through which the risks identified and
quantified in the economic perspective impact the projections under the normative
perspective: negative P&L impacts, direct own funds reductions, increased
provisioning and increased TREA. In all cases, institutions are expected to take a
differentiated approach when translating risks into impacts on projected Pillar 1
ratios. Economic perspective risks will generally not impact Pillar 1 projections one-
to-one. The extent to which risks impact those projections depends for example on
the scenario considered, and the applicable accounting rules and regulatory
provisions.
Example 3.3:
The normative perspective informs the economic perspective
The medium-term assessments of the normative internal perspective and the
respective underlying scenarios are expected to inform the forward-looking view of
the economic internal perspective insofar as these changes are not reflected in the
point-in-time risk quantification at the respective reference date. The projected
management actions foreseen in the normative perspective, e.g. capital measures,
dividend payments, or acquisitions or sales of business lines, are also expected to
be assessed to establish their impact on the economic substance of the institution.
This is expected to be done in the forward-looking view in the economic internal
perspective to ensure that those actions do not threaten economic capital adequacy.
By contrast, expected changes in interest rate curves and management actions that
have already been decided upon and that will occur during the risk horizon (of
usually at least one year) are usually taken into account in the short-term point-in-
time assessment under the economic perspective.
The adverse projections of the normative perspective are expected to simulate
institution-specific vulnerabilities. If such projections show a material impact
stemming from a particular risk type, e.g. migration risk, then the institution is
expected to ensure that this risk is adequately quantified in the point-in-time
calculation or complementary assessments (e.g. stress testing) under the economic
perspective.
For example, an institution with a material equity portfolio addresses this risk
exposure by assuming a severe stock market downturn in its normative perspective.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles    24

A severe impact on capital adequacy under the normative perspective informs the
economic perspective: the institution should analyse what impact such a severe but
plausible event would have on economic capital adequacy and whether the analysis
in the economic perspective adequately captures that scenario and allows the
institution to effectively manage that risk.
In practice, if the institution uses a value-at-risk (VaR) approach for quantifying
market risk in its economic perspective and the data underlying the risk quantification
only contain smooth stock market developments, then the risk quantification
underestimates the market risk. The institution may either adjust its risk
quantification assumptions, or allocate additional internal capital to the market risk
that is not captured by the risk quantification, or take other measures to ensure
sufficient capital to cover the risk. In line with the concept of conservatism in this
Guide, this does not necessarily mean that the institution is expected to change the
VaR quantification that may, for example, also be used for pricing purposes. It is the
institution itself that decides how to ensure that the risk is effectively managed and
covered by internal capital in a conservative manner.
Principle 4 – All material risks are identified and taken
into account in the ICAAP
(i)   The institution is responsible for implementing a regular process for identifying
      all material risks it is or might be exposed to under the economic and normative
      perspectives. All risks identified as material are expected to be addressed in all
      parts of the ICAAP in accordance with an internally defined risk taxonomy.
(ii)  Taking a comprehensive approach, including all relevant legal entities, business
      lines and exposures, the institution is expected to identify at least annually risks
      that are material, using its own internal definition of materiality. This risk
      identification process is expected to result in a comprehensive internal risk
      inventory.
(iii) In the case of financial and non-financial participations, subsidiaries, and other
      connected entities, the institution is expected to identify the significant
      underlying risks that it is or may be exposed to and take them into account in its
      ICAAP.
(iv) For all risks identified as material, the institution is expected either to allocate
      capital to cover the risk or to document the justification for not holding capital.
Risk identification process
59. The institution is expected to implement a regular process for identifying all
      material risks and include them in a comprehensive internal risk inventory.
      Using its internal definition of materiality, it is expected to ensure that the risk
      inventory is kept up to date. In addition to regular updates (at least yearly), it is
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles         25

     expected to adjust the inventory whenever it no longer reflects the risks that are
     material, e.g. because a new product has been introduced or certain business
     activities have been expanded.
60. The risk identification is expected to be comprehensive and take both normative
     and economic perspectives into account. In addition to its current risks, the
     institution is expected to consider in its forward-looking capital adequacy
     assessments any risks, and any concentrations within and between those
     risks 34, that may arise from pursuing its strategies or from relevant changes in
     its operating environment.
61. The risk identification process is expected to follow a “gross approach”,
     i.e. without taking into account specific techniques designed to mitigate the
     underlying risks. The institution is then expected to assess the effectiveness of
     these mitigating actions. 35
62. In line with the EBA Guidelines on limits on exposures to shadow banking
     entities (EBA/GL/2015/20), the institution is expected, as part of its risk
     identification approach, to identify its exposures to shadow banking entities, all
     potential risks arising from those exposures, and the potential impact of those
     risks.
63. The management body is responsible for deciding which risk types are to be
     considered material, and which material risks are to be covered by capital. This
     includes a justification of why a certain risk the institution is exposed to is not
     considered material.
Risk inventory
64. When determining its internal risk inventory, the institution is responsible for
     defining its own internal risk taxonomy. It is expected not to simply adhere to a
     regulatory risk taxonomy.
65. In its risk inventory, the institution is expected to take into account the
     underlying risks, where material, stemming from its financial and non-financial
     participations, subsidiaries and other connected entities (for example, step-in
     and group risks, reputational and operational risks, risks stemming from letters
     of comfort, etc.).
66. In a proportionate way, the institution is expected to look beyond participation
     risks and identify, understand and quantify significant underlying risks, and take
     them into account in its internal risk taxonomy, regardless of whether the
     entities concerned are included in the prudential perimeter or not. The depth of
34
   This refers to intra-risk and inter-risk concentrations.
35
   The “gross approach” explained here refers to the risk identification process. Institutions are not
   expected to disregard mitigating actions when they determine how much capital they need to cover
   their risks.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                     26

      the analysis of the underlying risks is expected to be commensurate with the
      business activity and the risk management approach.
Example 4.1:
Risk inventory
The risk list and mapping between risk types and risk sub-categories presented in
this example are not to be considered mandatory or exhaustive. There may be risks
in this list that are not material for some institutions, and this is expected to be
explained. At the same time, there will usually be risks not mentioned in the list that
are material. Each institution is expected to decide internally whether and how it
combines risk types and risk sub-categories:
•     credit risk (e.g. country risk, migration risk and concentration risk);
•     market risk (e.g. credit spread risk, structural foreign exchange (FX) risk and
      credit valuation adjustment (CVA) risk);
•     IRRBB (e.g. gap risk, basis risk, option risk and behavioural assumptions such
      as those on the usage of prepayment options);
•     operational risk (e.g. business disruption and systems failure, legal risk and
      model risk);
•     other risks (including, e.g. insurance risk, business risk, step-in risk, pension
      risk, participation risk, funding cost risk, reputational risk, etc.).
It remains the institution’s responsibility to determine all of its material risks, and all
concentrations between and within those risks, irrespective of whether they are listed
here or not.
Example 4.2:
Risk identification under the gross approach
Under the gross approach, risks are first identified without taking into account
specific techniques designed to mitigate them. A risk could be regarded as material if
its materialisation, omission or misstatement would significantly change or influence
the capital adequacy, profitability, or continuity of the institution from an economic
perspective, irrespective of the accounting treatment applied.
For example, an institution may identify that, based on the maturity profile of its
banking book, the risks arising from changes in the slope and the shape of the yield
curve (gap risk) should be considered material.
In this case, the gap risk is first expected to be identified, assessed and recorded in
the risk inventory without taking into account any management actions designed to
mitigate risks. Then, the management body is expected to be responsible for
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles         27

deciding whether the IRRBB (including gap risk) is indeed deemed material, and
whether it should be covered by capital.
The institution may decide to mitigate the risk through a combination of derivatives
and contractual arrangements, and not to set capital aside to cover the risk. Although
it is hedged in this case, the IRRBB is still expected to be considered a material risk
and included in the risk inventory, and the institution is expected to assess the
effectiveness of these actions and identify any new risks emerging (e.g. legal,
counterparty or residual risks).
Example 4.3:
Risk identification in the case of a non-financial subsidiary
Where an institution acts as a parent company for a non-financial subsidiary, the
prudential treatment of that subsidiary is based on its risk exposure amounts. In the
ICAAP, the institution is expected to establish and apply consistent and coherent
processes throughout the group in order to look beyond the accounting values and
risk exposure amounts. In particular, the institution is expected to apply proportionate
methodologies to identify whether the operations and exposures of the subsidiary
pose risks exceeding its accounting value or participation risk.
For example, the institution may identify that the customer profile and investments of
a significant subsidiary need to be taken into account in group level concentration
and dependency assumptions. Furthermore, the institution may identify that the legal
risks of the subsidiary add to the operational risk profile of the institution. As a result,
the institution may conclude that, through reputational and step-in risks and
increased concentration, the underlying risks of the subsidiary significantly exceed
the risk associated with the accounting value.
Example 4.4:
Risk identification in the case of outsourcing
Where an institution outsources its operations to a service provider, it is expected to
be able to identify, assess and quantify the underlying risks in the outsourcing
arrangement as if the institution itself still performed the operations. Such
identification, assessment and quantification is expected to take place before the
outsourcing is implemented, taking into account the specificities connected with
having the services performed outside of the institution. In general, the outsourcing
of an activity cannot relieve the institution from its obligation to manage the
associated risks and thus result in a delegation of responsibility to the outsourcing
provider.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles       28

Principle 5 – Internal capital is of high quality and clearly
defined
(i)     The institution is expected to define, assess and maintain internal capital under
        the economic perspective. The definition of internal capital is expected to be
        consistent with the economic capital adequacy concept and internal risk
        quantifications of the institution.
(ii)    Internal capital is expected to be of sound quality, and determined in a prudent
        and conservative manner. The institution is expected to show clearly, assuming
        the continuity of its operations, how its internal capital is available to cover risks,
        thereby ensuring that continuity.
Internal capital definition
67. The purpose of internal capital is to serve as a risk-bearing component under
        the economic perspective. Therefore, the definition of internal capital is
        expected to be in line with the economic capital adequacy concept of the
        institution 36 and the definition is expected to follow the economic value
        considerations, e.g. regarding its assets and liabilities. Taking a prudent and
        conservative approach, the definition is expected to allow the institution to
        produce a consistent and meaningful assessment of its economic capital
        adequacy over time, as described under Principle 3.
68. The institution is expected to recognise that, owing to different valuation
        methodologies and assumptions for assets, liabilities and transactions, the
        available internal capital under the economic perspective may differ significantly
        from the own funds under the normative perspective. The institution is expected
        to take a prudent approach when defining its available internal capital. This
        prudence applies to all underlying assumptions and methodologies used for the
        quantification of internal capital.
69. It is the responsibility of the institution to implement an adequate definition and
        methodology for its internal capital. This Guide neither prescribes nor restricts
        the use of any definition or methodology per se. The institution could use, for
        example, a fully fledged net present value model, or use the regulatory own
        funds as a starting point.
70. If the institution uses the regulatory own funds as a starting point for its internal
        capital definition, it is expected that a large part of its internal capital
        components will be expressed in Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) own funds. In
        addition, certain adjustments are conceptually necessary to arrive at the capital
        that is in line with the economic value concept underlying the economic
        perspective. Adjustments are expected, for example, for hidden losses and for
36
     Expectations regarding the maintenance of capital adequacy under the economic perspective are
     introduced under Principle 3.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                 29

       capital items that have loss-absorption capacity only in the case of non-
       continuation of the institution.
71. Where the internal capital definition is disconnected from the regulatory own
       funds, the risk-bearing capacity of a large part of the internal capital is still
       expected to be generally consistent with the loss-absorption capacity of CET1
       capital. In particular, institutions applying a model-based net present value
       approach are expected to only use methodologies and assumptions that are
       understandable, clearly outlined and justified, and following a prudent approach.
       Capital items that have loss-absorption capacity only in the case of non-
       continuation of the institution are expected to be treated as liabilities in such net
       present value approaches.
72. The institution is expected to be transparent about its internal capital, enabling a
       reconciliation, i.e. a comparison of differences and commonalities, between own
       funds under the normative perspective and available internal capital under the
       economic perspective insofar as possible.
Example 5.1:
Internal capital definition starting from regulatory own funds
An institution adopting, for example, a regulatory definition as a basis for its internal
capital determination needs to adjust the regulatory own funds where balance sheet
positions do not reflect the economic value concept underlying the economic
perspective. For example, the government bond portfolio introduced in Example 3.2,
which is subject to a total (net) hidden loss of €100 million, is expected to result in a
deduction of €100 million from regulatory own funds.
Such adjustments are expected to be addressed in a consistent way in both the
internal capital determination and the risk quantification. The institution could, for
example, deduct the hidden loss from both the internal capital and the risk exposure
or maintain the amount in the internal capital and quantify the risk as an expected
loss. Similarly, if an institution decides to include hidden reserves – which is
expected to be done only in a cautious and conservative manner, if at all – the risk
exposure is expected to be increased in line with the inclusion of hidden reserves in
internal capital.
It is the responsibility of the institution to define internal capital appropriately in line
with its economic internal perspective. However, in general, any balance sheet items
that cannot be deemed available to cover losses, assuming the continuation of the
institution (including Tier 2 capital instruments and deferred tax assets, or DTAs 37)
are expected to be deducted from regulatory own funds. In addition, it is expected to
be recognised that equity in subsidiaries held by third parties (minority interests) can
generally only be used to cover risks within that subsidiary.
37
     DTAs except for DTAs according to Art. 39 CRR, if the underlying positions are treated consistently in
     the quantification of both internal capital and risk.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                        30

Example 5.2:
Internal capital definition based on net present values
An institution may notice that the economic value of its debt decreases together with
a downgrade of its own creditworthiness. It would not be considered prudent for the
institution to increase available internal capital accordingly.
Principle 6 – ICAAP risk quantification methodologies are
adequate, consistent and independently validated
(i)    The institution is responsible for implementing risk quantification methodologies
       that are adequate for its individual circumstances under both the economic and
       normative perspectives. In addition, the institution is expected to use adequate
       methodologies for quantifying the potential future changes in own funds and
       TREA in its adverse scenarios under the normative perspective. The institution
       is expected to apply a high level of conservatism under both perspectives to
       ensure that rare/tail events are considered appropriately.
(ii)   The key parameters and assumptions are expected to be consistent throughout
       the group and between risk types. All risk quantification methodologies are
       expected to be subject to independent internal validation. The institution is
       expected to establish and implement an effective data quality framework.
Comprehensive risk quantification
73. The ICAAP is expected to ensure that risks that the institution is/may be
       exposed to are adequately quantified. The institution is expected to implement
       risk quantification methodologies that are tailored to its individual
       circumstances, (i.e. they are expected to be in line with its risk appetite, market
       expectations, business model, risk profile, size and complexity).
74. Risks are not expected to be excluded from the assessment because they are
       difficult to quantify or the relevant data are not available 38. In such cases, the
       institution is expected to determine sufficiently conservative risk figures, taking
       into consideration all relevant information and ensuring adequacy and
       consistency in its choice of risk quantification methodologies 39.
75. The key parameters and assumptions cover, inter alia, confidence levels,
       correlation assumptions, and scenario generation assumptions.
38
     For risks that are difficult to quantify (e.g. because of missing data or the absence of established
     quantification methodologies), the institution is expected to develop adequate methodologies to
     quantify unexpected losses, including using expert judgement.
39
     Risk measurement of difficult to quantify risks has to be consistent and comparable, as far as possible,
     with overall risk measurement assumptions. The institution is expected to ensure that such risks are
     appropriately factored into the risk management and risk control processes, regardless of whether they
     are quantified using traditional models or scenario analysis, or informed by other estimates.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                        31

Level of conservatism
76. The risk quantification methodologies and assumptions used under the
      economic and normative perspectives are expected to be robust, sufficiently
      stable, risk sensitive, and conservative enough to quantify losses that occur
      rarely. Uncertainties arising from risk quantification methodologies are expected
      to be addressed by an increased level of conservatism.
77. In the view of the ECB, in a sound ICAAP the overall level of conservatism in
      the assumptions under the economic perspective is generally at least on a par
      with the level underlying the risk quantification methodologies of the Pillar 1
      internal models. 40 Rather than one-by-one, the overall level of conservatism is
      determined by the combination of underlying assumptions and parameters.
      That means that an approach can, in practice, still be sufficiently conservative if
      selected assumptions are less conservative, as long as the overall level of
      conservatism remains high 41.
78. Instead of mechanically aiming at external credit rating objectives and statistical
      confidence levels, the institution is expected to calibrate its risk quantification
      methodologies on the basis of its own risk appetite. For this purpose, the
      institution is expected to consider possible losses it is willing and able to absorb
      over time. Based on this analysis, the institution is expected to establish and
      maintain risk quantification methodologies, including the assessment of stress
      events, that provide it with sufficient confidence that possible losses stemming
      from rare tail events or severe future developments are addressed in its
      strategies and risk appetite, and that these losses will not exceed the quantified
      risk.
79. The institution may consider a range of different levels of conservatism to
      produce a range of risk quantifications, in order to comprehensively inform
      strategic decisions, pricing and capital management. An institution may, for
      example, decide to apply a lower level of conservatism when pricing certain
      products, as long as there are processes in place that ensure that rare tail
      events and severe future developments are being effectively managed and are
      covered by sufficient capital.
80. In order to facilitate the comparison between Pillar 1 and ICAAP risk
      quantifications, regardless of the Pillar 1 approach chosen (e.g. standardised or
      internal ratings-based (IRB) approach for credit risk), the institution is expected
      to take into account what is set out in the ECB document “Technical
      implementation of the EBA Guidelines on ICAAP and ILAAP information
40
   The Pillar 1 capital requirements are, however, not expected to be regarded as a floor in the internal
   risk quantifications of the institution.
41
   Depending on the risk profile, internal risk parameters could be considered to be more conservative
   overall than Pillar 1, even if, for example, the confidence level is below 99.9%, subject to the
   combination of this confidence level with risk factors applied, distribution assumptions, holding periods,
   correlation assumptions and other parameters and assumptions. Where banks use a range of stress
   scenarios, they are expected to use coherent methods to integrate them to arrive at an overall level of
   conservatism that is comparable with, for example, the 99.9% confidence concept when using the
   economic capital approach.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                        32

     collected for SREP purposes”. If there are differences between the two
     quantifications, the institution is expected to explain the main drivers for them.
Choice of risk quantification methodologies
81. It is the responsibility of the institution to implement adequate methodologies
     both to quantify its risks and to determine projections. This Guide does not set
     out any expectation regarding using or not using any quantification
     methodology per se. This means that there is no predetermination as to
     whether, for example, the institution is expected to use (amended) Pillar 1
     methodologies (e.g. to take into account concentration risks), economic capital
     models, stress test results or other methodologies, such as multiple scenarios,
     to quantify the risks it is or may be exposed to.
82. The methodologies used are expected to be consistent with each other, with the
     perspective considered and with the definition of capital. They are expected to
     capture the risks to which the institution is exposed in an adequate and
     sufficiently conservative manner, taking into account the principle of
     proportionality. This means, for example, that larger or more complex
     institutions, or institutions that have more complex risks, are expected to use
     more sophisticated risk quantification methodologies to capture the risks in an
     adequate manner.
83. However, the institution is not expected to implement risk quantification
     methodologies that it does not fully understand and which, consequently, are
     not used for its own internal risk management and decision-making. The
     institution is expected to be able to demonstrate the adequacy of the
     methodologies for its individual situation and risk profile. In the case of vendor
     models, this includes the expectation that such models are not expected to be
     imported mechanistically, but rather they are expected to be fully understood by
     the institution and well suited for, and tailored to, its business and its risk profile.
Data quality
84. The institution is expected to deploy adequate processes and control
     mechanisms to ensure the quality of data. 42 The data quality framework is
     expected to ensure reliable risk information that supports sound decision-
     making, and it is expected to cover all relevant risk data and data quality
     dimensions.
42
   Data quality comprises, for example, the completeness, accuracy, consistency, timeliness, uniqueness,
   validity and traceability of the data. For more information, see the draft ECB Guide for the Targeted
   Review of Internal Models (TRIM) of February 2017.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                       33

Risk diversification effects
85. The institution is expected to take a prudent approach whenever assuming risk
      diversification effects. The institution is expected to be aware that, in line with
      the EBA SREP guidelines, 43 supervisors as a matter of principle will not take
      into account inter-risk diversification in the SREP. The institution is expected to
      take this into account, and be cautious when applying inter-risk diversification in
      its ICAAP.
86. The institution is expected to be fully transparent about assumed risk
      diversification effects and, at least in the case of inter-risk diversification, report
      gross figures before diversification in addition to net figures. The institution is
      expected to ensure that risks are adequately covered by capital, even in times
      of stress when diversification effects may disappear or behave in non-linear
      ways (even reinforcing each other in an extreme scenario) 44.
87. The institution is expected to target diversification effects in its stress-testing
      framework, involving, for example, intra-risk and inter-risk correlations and
      diversification between group entities.
Independent validation
88. ICAAP risk quantification methodologies are expected to be subject to regular
      independent internal 45 validation, respecting, in a proportionate way, the
      principles underlying the respective standards established for Pillar 1 internal
      models, taking into account the materiality of the risks quantified and the
      complexity of the risk quantification methodology.
89. Depending on the size and complexity of the institution, various organisational
      solutions may be adopted to ensure independence between the development
      and validation of risk quantification methodologies. However, the concepts
      underlying the various lines of defence are expected to be respected; i.e. the
      independent validation is expected to not be conducted by the internal audit
      function.
90. The overall conclusions of the validation process are expected to be reported to
      senior management and the management body, used in the regular review and
43
   EBA Guidelines on the revised common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory review and
   evaluation process (SREP) and supervisory stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/03) of 19 July 2018. For more
   detail, see also the Opinion of the EBA on the interaction of Pillar 1, Pillar 2 and combined buffer
   requirements and restrictions on distributions (EBA/Op/2015/24) of 16 December 2015.
44
   For example, adding the separately estimated risk components may not be as conservative as often
   thought, because non-linear interactions may lead to compounding effects. See “Findings on the
   interaction of market and credit risk”, BCBS Working Paper, No 16, Basel Committee on Banking
   Supervision, May 2009.
45
   “Internal” does not mean that the institution itself is expected to carry out each and every validation
   activity. As with “internal” audit, this rather refers to the fact that the institution is responsible for this
   process.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                                 34

      adjustment of the quantification methodologies, and taken into account when
      assessing capital adequacy.
Example 6.1:
Organisation of independent validations
In order to ensure the independent and proportionate validation of ICAAP risk
quantification methodologies, the institution is expected to take into consideration the
draft ECB guide to Internal Models – General topics chapter.
Depending on the nature, size, scale and complexity of its risks, the institution may,
for example, employ one of the following three organisational arrangements to
ensure the independence of the validation function from the methodology
development process (i.e. design, development, implementation and monitoring of
the risk quantification methodologies):
•     separation into two different units reporting to different members of the senior
      management;
•     separation into two different units reporting to the same member of the senior
      management;
•     separate staff within the same unit.
Principle 7 – Regular stress testing is aimed at ensuring
capital adequacy in adverse circumstances
(i)   The ECB expects the institution to perform a tailored and in-depth review of its
      vulnerabilities, capturing all material risks on an institution-wide basis that result
      from its business model and operating environment in the context of stressed
      macroeconomic and financial conditions on a yearly basis and more frequently,
      when necessary, depending on the individual circumstances. On the basis of
      this review, the institution is expected to define an adequate stress-testing
      programme for both normative and economic perspectives.
(ii)  As part of the stress-testing programme, the institution is expected to determine
      adverse scenarios to be used under the normative perspective, taking into
      account other stress tests it conducts. The application of severe, but plausible
      macroeconomic assumptions and a focus on key vulnerabilities are expected to
      result in a material impact on the institution’s internal and regulatory capital, for
      example with regard to the CET1 ratio. In addition, the institution is expected to
      conduct reverse stress testing in a proportionate manner.
(iii) The institution is expected to continuously monitor and identify new threats,
      vulnerabilities and changes in the environment to assess at least quarterly
      whether its stress-testing scenarios remain appropriate and, if not, adapt them
      to the new circumstances. The impact of the scenarios is expected to be
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles        35

     updated regularly (e.g. quarterly). In the case of material changes, the
     institution is expected to assess their potential impact on its capital adequacy
     over the course of the year.
Determination of the stress-testing programme
91. The stress-testing programme is expected to cover both the normative and the
     economic perspective 46. When defining the set of internal stress scenarios and
     sensitivities, the institution is expected to use a broad set of information on
     historical and hypothetical stress events, including supervisory stress tests.
     However, although it is expected to take supervisory stress tests into
     consideration, it is the institution’s own responsibility to define scenarios and
     sensitivities in the manner that best addresses its individual situation and to
     translate them into risk, loss and capital figures.
92. When defining stress-testing scenarios, e.g. for the projections under the
     normative perspective, institutions are expected to capture their material
     vulnerabilities, given their individual business model, risk profile and the
     external conditions they face. Other stress tests conducted, e.g. sensitivity
     analysis, are expected to inform the scenarios used by revealing the material
     vulnerabilities of the institution.
Severity level of adverse scenarios under the normative
perspective
93. In its baseline assessment, the institution is expected to assume developments
     that it would assume under expected circumstances, taking into account its
     business strategy, including credible assumptions on revenues, costs, risk
     materialisations, etc.
94. In adverse scenarios under the normative perspective, the institution is
     expected to assume exceptional, but plausible developments with an adequate
     degree of severity in terms of their impact on its regulatory capital ratios, in
     particular the CET1 ratio. The level of severity is expected to correspond to
     developments that are plausible, but as severe from the institution’s perspective
     as any developments that might be observed during a crisis situation in the
     markets, factors or areas that are most relevant for the institution’s capital
     adequacy.
95. The range of adverse scenarios is expected to adequately cover severe
     economic downturns and financial shocks, relevant institution-specific
46
   Stress-testing activities under the economic perspective are not expected to be multi-year scenario
   projections, as explained under Principle 3. Depending on the approach taken by the institution, the
   stress tests under the economic perspective are used, for example, to assess the sensitivity of risk
   quantifications to modelling assumptions and risk drivers or to assess the impact of changes in external
   conditions, in particular adverse developments, on the economic capital adequacy.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      36

      vulnerabilities, exposures to major counterparties, and plausible combinations
      of these 47.
Coherence versus targeting key vulnerabilities
96. In stress testing, the institution is expected to focus on its key vulnerabilities
      when attempting to define plausible adverse scenarios. ICAAP and ILAAP
      stress tests are expected to inform each other; i.e. the underlying assumptions,
      stress test results and projected management actions are expected to be
      mutually taken into account.
Reverse stress testing
97. In addition to stress-testing activities that assess the impact of certain
      assumptions on capital ratios, the institution is expected to conduct reverse
      stress-testing assessments. These assessments are expected to start from the
      identification of the pre-defined outcome, such as the business model becoming
      unviable 48 (e.g. a breach of its TSCR or management buffers).
98. Such reverse stress tests are expected to be used to challenge the
      comprehensiveness and conservatism of the ICAAP framework assumptions,
      under both the normative and the economic internal framework. Reverse stress
      tests are expected to be conducted at least once a year. Depending on the
      likelihood of the resulting scenarios, it may be necessary to immediately
      address the scenarios by taking or preparing management actions in the ICAAP
      in order to prevent a recovery situation that would occur if one or more of the
      reverse stress-testing scenarios assessed in the ICAAP were to become reality.
      Moreover, reverse stress testing in the ICAAP context could be seen as a
      starting point for developing recovery plan scenarios 49. More details can be
      found in the relevant EBA guidelines and BCBS guidance.
Example 7.1:
Interaction between ICAAP and ILAAP stress tests
The institution is expected to assess the potential impact of relevant scenarios,
integrating capital and liquidity impacts and potential feedback loops, taking into
47
    The number of scenarios that is adequate for an institution depends on, among other things, its
    individual risk profile. It is expected that several adverse scenarios will usually be necessary to
    adequately reflect the different plausible combinations of risks.
48
    See the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04).
49
    As outlined in the EBA Guidelines on the range of scenarios to be used in recovery plans
    (EBA/GL/2014/06), these scenarios are expected to be only “near-default”, i.e. they are expected to
    lead to an institution’s or group’s business model becoming non-viable unless the recovery actions are
    successfully implemented.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles                      37

account, in particular, losses arising from the liquidation of assets or increases in
funding costs during periods of stress.
For example, institutions are expected to assess the impact of deteriorating capital
levels, as projected in the ICAAP, on their liquidity situation. For instance a
downgrade by an external rating agency could have direct implications for the
refinancing ability of the institution. Vice versa, the refinancing needs and conditions
assessed in the liquidity and funding plans can have a material impact on the costs
of funding, which would, in turn, impact the capital adequacy.
Example 7.2:
Interaction between economic and normative perspective stress tests
It is not necessarily the case that the stress-testing scenarios with the highest
impacts on capital adequacy are the same for both perspectives. However, adverse
scenarios defined for the normative perspective and stress testing in the economic
perspective both reflect severe, but plausible developments. As such plausible
developments, by definition, can realistically happen, it is important for the institution
to understand what impact they would have on capital adequacy under each
perspective. However, this mutual information concept does not mean that
projections under the normative perspective are mechanically repeated under the
economic perspective.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Principles       38

3 Glossary
  Adverse scenario
  A combination of assumed adverse developments in internal and external factors
  (including macroeconomic and financial developments) that is used to assess the
  resilience of the capital adequacy of the institution to potential adverse developments
  over a medium-term horizon. It is expected to cover at least three years. The
  assumed developments in internal and external factors are expected to be combined
  in a consistent way and be severe but plausible from the institution’s perspective,
  reflecting the risks and vulnerabilities that are assessed as representing the most
  pertinent threats to the institution.
  Baseline scenario
  A combination of expected developments in internal and external factors (including
  macroeconomic and financial developments) that is used to assess the impact of
  those expected developments on the capital adequacy of the institution over a
  medium-term horizon. The baseline scenario is expected to be consistent with the
  basis of the institution’s business plans and budget, and cover a time horizon of at
  least three years.
  Capital adequacy statement
  A formal statement from the management body providing its assessment of the
  capital adequacy of the institution and explaining its main supporting arguments.
  Capital adequacy
  The degree to which risks are covered by capital. The ICAAP is aimed at maintaining
  adequate capitalisation on an ongoing basis, from both the economic and normative
  perspectives, contributing to the continuity of the institution over the medium term.
  Capital planning
  A multidimensional internal process under the normative perspective, resulting in a
  capital plan presenting a multi-year projection of the capital demand and supply of
  the institution, taking into account its baseline and adverse scenarios, strategy and
  operational plans. Although institutions may not “plan” to enter into adverse
  conditions, the assessment of adverse scenarios is a key element of capital planning
  as it helps institutions to continue operating even in a prolonged period of stress.
  Diversification effect
  A reduction in the overall risk quantification of an institution stemming from the
  assumption that individually estimated risks will not materialise to the full extent at
  the same time (lack of perfect correlation).
  Economic capital adequacy concept
  An internal concept aimed at ensuring under the economic perspective that the
  financial resources (internal capital) of the institution will enable it to cover its risks
  ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Glossary            39

and maintain the continuity of its operations on an ongoing basis. Economic capital
adequacy takes into account economic value considerations. 50
Economic internal perspective
An ICAAP perspective under which the institution manages its economic capital
adequacy by ensuring that its economic risks are sufficiently covered by available
internal capital.
Economic risk
A risk that may impact the economic value of the institution, thus impacting economic
capital adequacy. When identifying, assessing and quantifying such risks, the
institution is expected to take into account economic value considerations.
Economic value considerations
The economic value concept is based on the value of assets, liabilities, risks and the
institution as such from an economic perspective. The economic value is not based
on accounting or regulatory provisions. However, depending on the accounting
standards applied, the economic value concept can be similar to the fair value
concept underlying the valuation of certain assets and liabilities in particular
accounting categories. In line with those standards, the economic value/fair value
could be defined as the estimated price at which an asset could theoretically be sold
to a third party or a liability settled in an orderly transaction under the relevant market
conditions 51. In the regulatory world, the economic value concept is reflected in, for
example, the Economic Value of Equity (EVE) approach described in the EBA
Guidelines on the management of interest rate risk arising from non-trading
activities.
The use of the term “considerations” means that the ECB does not prescribe a
particular methodology for determining economic values. Rather, it is the
responsibility of the institutions themselves to apply adequate methodologies for
identifying and quantifying their economic risks and their internal capital, in line with
economic value considerations.
Expected and unexpected losses
The expected loss is the statistical mean loss the institution expects over a given
period of time. The unexpected loss is the total loss exceeding the mean loss,
stemming from a downside tail event.
Gross approach in risk identification
The gross approach means that risks are first identified without taking into account
specific actions designed to mitigate them.
50
    It is the responsibility of the institutions themselves to implement adequate risk quantification
    methodologies – there is no general expectation that institutions will utilise “economic capital models”
    to ensure economic capital adequacy.
51
    Example 5.2 describes the expectations regarding fair values of liabilities in view of the
    creditworthiness of the institution itself.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Glossary                           40

Hidden losses and reserves
Valuation differences between accounting values and economic values of balance
sheet positions.
ICAAP architecture
Different elements of the ICAAP and how they interlink. The ICAAP architecture is
expected to ensure that the different elements of the ICAAP fit together coherently
and that the ICAAP is an integral part of the institution’s overall management
framework. The institution is expected to maintain, as part of its ICAAP
documentation, a description of the overall ICAAP architecture that explains how the
ICAAP is integrated and how its outcomes are used in the institution.
ICAAP outcomes
Any information that results from the ICAAP and adds value to decision-making.
ICAAP
The internal capital adequacy assessment process as defined in Article 73 CRD IV:
“Institutions shall have in place sound, effective and comprehensive strategies and
processes to assess and maintain on an ongoing basis the amounts, types and
distribution of internal capital that they consider adequate to cover the nature and
level of the risks to which they are or might be exposed.”
Internal review and validation
Internal review covers a broad range of controls, evaluations and reports aimed at
ensuring that ICAAP strategies, processes and methodologies remain sound,
comprehensive, effective and proportionate.
Validation, as part of the internal review, encompasses processes and activities
assessing whether the risk quantification methodologies and risk data of the
institution adequately capture relevant aspects of risk. In a proportionate way, the
validation of risk quantification methodologies is expected to be conducted
independently and respect the principles underlying the respective standards
established for Pillar 1 internal models.
Limit system
A documented and hierarchical system of limits set in line with the overall strategy
and risk appetite of the institution in order to ensure that risks and losses can be
limited effectively in line with the capital adequacy concept. The limit system is
expected to lay down effective boundaries for risk taking for, for example, different
risk types, business areas, products and group entities.
Management actions
Actions taken by the management, such as raising capital, to keep the capital at
adequate levels, i.e. within the risk appetite 52.
52
    For more guidance see the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04),
    Section 4.8.2 Management actions.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Glossary               41

Management buffer
An amount of capital above the regulatory and supervisory minima and internal
capital thresholds that the institution considers necessary in order to sustainably
follow its business model and to remain flexible regarding possible business
opportunities, without endangering its capital adequacy.
Material risk
A capital-related downside risk that, based on the institution’s internal definitions, has
a material impact on its overall risk profile, and thus may affect the capital adequacy
of the institution.
Medium-term time horizon
A time horizon which captures the near and medium-term future. It is expected to
capture the capital position over at least the upcoming three years.
Normative internal perspective
A multi-year ICAAP perspective under which the institution manages its capital
adequacy by ensuring that it is able to fulfil all of its capital-related legal requirements
and supervisory demands and cope with other internal and external capital
constraints on an ongoing basis.
Proportionality
A principle in Article 73 CRD IV which states that the ICAAP shall be proportionate to
the nature, scale and complexity of the activities of the institution concerned.
Recovery plan
A plan drawn up and maintained by an institution in accordance with Article 5 of the
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) 53.
Reverse stress test
A stress test which starts from the identification of the pre-defined outcome (non-
viability of the business model) and then explores scenarios and circumstances that
might cause that outcome to occur.
Risk appetite statement
A formal statement in which the management body expresses its views on the
amounts and types of risk that the institution is willing to take in order to meet its
strategic objectives.
Risk horizon
The risk horizon is the assumed period of time over which the risk is assessed.
Under the economic perspective, the risk horizon is usually one year.
53
    Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a
    framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending
    Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC,
    2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU)
    No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 190).
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Glossary                       42

Risk identification process
A regular process the institution uses to identify risks that are or might be material for
the institution.
Risk inventory
A list of identified risks and their characteristics. The risk inventory is the result of the
risk identification process.
Risk quantification
The process of quantifying identified risks by developing and using methodologies to
determine risk figures and enable a comparison between the risks and the available
capital of the institution.
Risk taxonomy
A categorisation of different risk types/factors enabling the institution to assess,
aggregate and manage risks in a consistent way through a common risk language
and mapping.
Risk tolerance
The types of risks and levels of those risks that the institution does not intentionally
expose itself to, but accepts/tolerates.
ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) - Glossary           43

Abbreviations
AT1           Additional Tier 1                                       LSI       Less significant institution
BCBS          Basel Committee on Banking Supervision                  MDA       Maximum distributable amount
BRRD          Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive                  MREL      Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible
                                                                                liabilities
CAS           capital adequacy statement
                                                                      NCA       National competent authority
CBR           combined buffer requirement
                                                                      OCR       Overall capital requirement (TSCR+CBR)
CET1          Common Equity Tier 1
                                                                      P1R       Pillar 1 capital requirement
CRD IV        Capital Requirements Directive
                                                                      P2G       Pillar 2 capital guidance
CVA           Credit valuation adjustment
                                                                      P2R       Pillar 2 capital requirement
DTA           Deferred tax assets
                                                                      RAF       Risk appetite framework
EAD           Exposure at default
                                                                      SI        Significant institution
EBA           European Banking Authority
                                                                      SREP      Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process
ECB           European Central Bank
                                                                      SSM       Single Supervisory Mechanism
FSB           Financial Stability Board
                                                                      TREA      Total risk exposure amount
ICAAP         Internal capital adequacy assessment process
                                                                      TRIM      Targeted Review of Internal Models
ILAAP         Internal liquidity adequacy assessment process
                                                                      TSCR      Total SREP capital requirement (P1R+P2R)
IRB           Internal ratings-based
IRRBB         Interest rate risk in the banking book
LGD           Loss given default
© European Central Bank, 2018
Postal address                       60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Telephone                            +49 69 1344 0
Website                              www.ecb.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

