ECB Guide to the internal
liquidity adequacy
assessment process
(ILAAP)
  November 2018

Contents
1     Introduction                                                                  2
      1.1      Purpose                                                              3
      1.2      Scope and proportionality                                            3
2     Principles                                                                    5
      Principle 1 – The management body is responsible for the sound
      governance of the ILAAP                                                       5
      Principle 2 – The ILAAP is an integral part of the overall management
      framework                                                                     7
      Principle 3 – The ILAAP contributes fundamentally to the continuity of
      the institution by ensuring its liquidity adequacy from different
      perspectives                                                                 13
      Principle 4 – All material risks are identified and taken into account in
      the ILAAP                                                                    18
      Principle 5 – The internal liquidity buffers are of high quality and clearly
      defined; the internal stable sources of funding are clearly defined          21
      Principle 6 – ILAAP risk quantification methodologies are adequate,
      consistent and independently validated                                       22
      Principle 7 – Regular stress testing is aimed at ensuring liquidity
      adequacy in adverse circumstances                                            25
3     Glossary                                                                     29
Abbreviations                                                                      33
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Contents  1

1 Introduction
  1.    The recent financial crisis has shown the fundamental importance of liquidity 1
        for credit institutions, as insufficient liquidity poses an immediate threat to their
        continuity. One of the main lessons learned 2 is that their liquidity risk
        management has to ensure their ability to fulfil their payment obligations at all
        times, even under adverse conditions.
  2.    Accordingly, the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) plays
        a key role in the risk management of credit institutions. As regards significant
        institutions established in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the ECB
        expects the ILAAP in accordance with the provisions in Article 86 of the Capital
        Requirements Directive (CRD IV) 3 to be prudent and conservative 4. The ECB is
        of the view that sound, effective and comprehensive ILAAPs comprise a clear
        assessment of the risks to liquidity, and have well-structured risk governance
        and risk escalation processes based on a well-thought out and thorough risk
        strategy that is translated into an effective risk limit system.
  3.    In the ECB’s view, a sound, effective and comprehensive ILAAP is based on
        two pillars: the economic and the normative perspectives. Both perspectives are
        expected to complement and inform each other.
  4.    The ILAAP is also an important input factor in the SSM Supervisory Review and
        Evaluation Process (SREP). It feeds into all SREP assessments and into the
        Pillar 2 liquidity determination process in accordance with the EBA Guidelines
        on common procedures and methodologies for the SREP.
  5.    In the SREP, it is acknowledged that a good ILAAP reduces an institution’s and
        its supervisors’ uncertainty concerning the risks that the institution is or may be
        exposed to, and gives supervisors an increased level of confidence in the
        institution’s ability to continue operating by maintaining adequate liquidity
        buffers and stable funding and by managing its risks effectively. This requires
        the institution, in a forward-looking manner, to ensure that all material risks are
        identified, effectively managed (using an appropriate combination of
        quantification and controls) and covered by a sufficient level of high-quality
        liquidity buffers.
  1
     For the purpose of this Guide, the term “liquidity” covers both liquidity and funding.
  2
     See, for example, The Basel Committee’s response to the financial crisis: report to the G20, Basel
     Committee on Banking Supervision, October 2010.
  3
     Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the
     activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms,
     amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176,
     27.6.2013, p. 338).
  4
     Article 86(1) CRD IV: “Competent authorities shall ensure that institutions have robust strategies,
     policies, processes and systems for the identification, measurement, management and monitoring of
     liquidity risk over an appropriate set of time horizons, including intra-day, so as to ensure that
     institutions maintain adequate levels of liquidity buffers.”
  ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Introduction                         2

1.1 Purpose
    6.   The purpose of this ECB Guide to the ILAAP (the “Guide”) is to provide
         transparency by making public the ECB’s understanding of the liquidity risk
         requirements following from Article 86 CRD IV. The Guide is aimed at assisting
         institutions in strengthening their ILAAPs and at encouraging the use of best
         practices by explaining in greater detail the ECB’s expectations on the ILAAP,
         leading to more consistent and effective supervision.
    7.   The Guide deduces from the CRD IV liquidity risk provisions seven principles
         that will be considered, inter alia, in the assessment of each institution’s ILAAP
         as part of the SREP. These principles will also be referred to in discussions with
         individual institutions in the supervisory dialogue.
    8.   The Guide does not substitute or supersede any applicable law implementing
         Article 86 CRD IV. Insofar as the Guide is not in line with applicable law, the
         applicable law prevails. The Guide is intended to be a practical tool that is
         updated regularly to reflect new developments and experience. Consequently,
         the principles and expectations laid out in this Guide will evolve over time. It will
         be reviewed in the light of the ongoing development of European banking
         supervision practice and methodologies, international and European regulatory
         developments and, for example, new authoritative interpretations of relevant
         directives and regulations by the Court of Justice of the European Union.
    9.   This Guide follows a principles-based approach with a focus on selected key
         aspects from a supervisory perspective. It is not meant to provide complete
         guidance on all aspects relevant for sound ILAAPs. The implementation of an
         ILAAP that is adequate for an institution’s particular circumstances remains the
         responsibility of the institution. The ECB assesses institutions’ ILAAPs on a
         case-by-case basis.
    10. In addition to this Guide, and in addition to relevant Union law and national law,
         institutions are encouraged to take into account other ILAAP-relevant
         publications from the EBA 5 and international fora like the Basel Committee on
         Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB).
         Furthermore, institutions should take into account all ILAAP-related
         recommendations addressed to them, e.g. recommendations resulting from the
         SREP, such as those related to sound governance, to risk management and to
         controls.
1.2 Scope and proportionality
    11. This Guide is relevant for any credit institution that is considered to be a
         significant supervised entity as referred to in Article 2 (16) of the SSM
    5
       Of particular relevance in this regard are the EBA Guidelines on internal governance
       (EBA/GL/2017/11), the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04) and the CEBS
       Guidelines on the management of concentration risk under the supervisory review process (GL31).
    ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Introduction               3

      Framework Regulation 6. The scope of application of Article 86 CRD IV on
      ILAAP scope is determined by Article 109 CRD IV. Given that Article 86 CRD IV
      is a minimum harmonisation provision, and its transposition has been dealt with
      in different ways in different EU Member States, a wide variety of ILAAP
      practices and requirements for the supervision of credit institutions exist across
      participating Member States.
12. The ECB, together with the national competent authorities (NCAs), has
      developed ILAAP principles. The objective of these principles is to ensure high
      standards of supervision by fostering the development of common
      methodologies in this important supervisory area.
13. The ILAAP is, above all, an internal process, and it remains the responsibility of
      individual institutions to implement it in a proportionate and credible manner.
      Pursuant to Article 86 CRD IV, ILAAPs have to be proportionate to the nature,
      scale and complexity of the activities of the institution.
14. The principles developed in this Guide shall only serve as a starting point in
      supervisory dialogues with credit institutions. Therefore, they should not be
      understood as comprehensively covering all aspects necessary to implement
      and use a sound, effective and comprehensive ILAAP. It is the responsibility of
      the institution to ensure that its ILAAP remains comprehensive and
      proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of its activities, bearing in
      mind that proportionality is not to be applied in a way that undermines the
      effectiveness of its ILAAP.
6
   Regulation (EU) No 468/2014 of the European Central Bank of 16 April 2014 establishing the
   framework for cooperation within the Single Supervisory Mechanism between the European Central
   Bank and national competent authorities and with national designated authorities (SSM Framework
   Regulation) (ECB/2014/17) (OJ L 141, 14.5.2014, p. 1).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Introduction             4

2 Principles
  Principle 1 – The management body is responsible for
  the sound governance of the ILAAP
  (i)    In view of the major role of the ILAAP for the institution, all of its key elements
         are expected to be approved by the management body. This is expected to be
         reflected in the internal governance arrangements for the management body,
         set up in accordance with national regulations and in line with relevant Union
         law and EBA guidelines. The management body, senior management and
         relevant committees are expected to discuss and challenge the ILAAP in an
         effective way.
  (ii)   Each year, the management body is expected to provide its assessment of the
         liquidity adequacy of the institution, supported by ILAAP outcomes and any
         other relevant information, by producing and signing a clear and concise
         statement, the liquidity adequacy statement (LAS).
  (iii) The management body has overall responsibility for the implementation of the
         ILAAP, and it is expected to approve an ILAAP governance framework with a
         clear and transparent assignment of responsibilities, adhering to the
         segregation of functions. The governance framework is expected to include a
         clear approach to the regular internal review and validation of the ILAAP.
  The management body approves key elements of the ILAAP
  15. The management body is expected to produce and sign the LAS, and approve
         the key elements of the ILAAP, for example:
         •     the governance framework;
         •     the internal documentation framework;
         •     the perimeter of entities captured, the risk identification process, and the
               internal risk inventory and taxonomy, reflecting the scope of material risks
               as well as the coverage of those risks by liquidity;
         •     risk quantification methodologies, 7 including high-level risk measurement
               assumptions and parameters (e.g. time horizon, confidence levels, 8 and
               maturity profile), supported by reliable data and sound data aggregation
               systems;
  7
       The ILAAP Guide does not prescribe a particular methodology for quantifying risks. This is explained in
       more detail in the section on “Choice of risk quantification methodologies” under Principle 6.
  8
       Such as in the case of non-maturing deposits modelling.
  ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                       5

     •      the approach used to assess liquidity adequacy (including the stress-
            testing framework and a well-articulated definition of liquidity adequacy);
     •      quality assurance of the ILAAP, particularly with regard to key inputs for
            the LAS (including the set-up and role of internal validation, the use of self-
            assessment against applicable rules, regulations and supervisory
            expectations, controls in place for validating the institution’s data, stress
            test results, models applied, etc.).
16. The management body comprises a supervisory function and a management
     function that may be performed by a single body or two separate bodies. Which
     key elements of the ILAAP are approved by which function depends on the
     internal governance arrangements of the institution. This will be interpreted by
     the ECB in accordance with national regulations and in line with relevant Union
     law and EBA guidelines 9.
Internal review and validation
17. The ILAAP shall be subject to regular internal review. This regular internal
     review is expected by the ECB to cover both qualitative and quantitative
     aspects, including, for example the use of ILAAP outcomes, the stress-testing
     framework, risk capture, and the data aggregation process, including
     proportionate validation processes for internal risk quantification methodologies
     used.
18. For this purpose, the institution is expected to have in place adequate policies
     and processes for internal reviews. The reviews are expected to be conducted
     by the three lines of defence, consisting of the business lines and the
     independent internal control functions (risk management, compliance and
     internal audit), in accordance with their respective roles and responsibilities 10.
19. The ECB expects a defined process to be in place in order to ensure proactive
     adjustment of the ILAAP to any material changes that occur, such as entering
     new markets, providing new services, offering new products, or changes in the
     structure of the group 11 or financial conglomerate.
20. ILAAP outcomes and assumptions are expected to be subject to adequate
     internal review, covering, for example, liquidity planning, scenarios, and risk
     quantification. The extent to which this challenge is expected to be quantitative
     as opposed to qualitative depends on the nature of the element assessed. This
     review is expected to take due account of the limits and constraints arising from
9
   See recital 56, points (7) to (9) of Article 3(1) CRD IV and Title II of the EBA Guidelines on internal
   governance (EBA/GL/2017/11).
10
   The respective roles of the functions involved are described in the EBA Guidelines on internal
   governance (EBA/GL/2017/11).
11
   For the purpose of this Guide, the term “institution” also refers to groups, conglomerates or sub-groups,
   as applicable in accordance with Article 109 CRD IV.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                       6

       the methodologies employed, the underlying assumptions and the input data
       used in quantifying the risk.
21. The purpose of the review is to scrutinise whether the internal processes,
       chosen methodologies and assumptions have led to sound outcomes (“back-
       testing 12”) and whether they remain appropriate with a view to the current
       situation and future developments. The outcome of this review is expected to be
       thoroughly assessed, documented and reported to senior management and the
       management body. In case any weaknesses have been identified, effective
       follow-up actions are expected to lead to a quick rectification of the findings.
Liquidity adequacy statement
22. In the liquidity adequacy statement (LAS), the management body provides its
       assessment of the liquidity adequacy of the institution and explains its main
       supporting arguments, backed by information it considers relevant, including
       ILAAP outcomes. The ECB is of the view that a sound LAS demonstrates that
       the management body has a good understanding of the liquidity adequacy of
       the entity, its main drivers and vulnerabilities, the main ILAAP inputs and
       outputs, the parameters and processes underlying the ILAAP, and the
       coherence of the ILAAP with its strategic plans.
23. The authority to sign the LAS on behalf of the management body is expected to
       be decided by the institution in the light of national regulations and relevant
       prudential requirements and guidelines. 13
Principle 2 – The ILAAP is an integral part of the overall
management framework
(i)    Pursuant to Article 86(1) CRD IV, the institution is expected to have robust
       strategies, policies, processes and systems for the identification, measurement,
       management and monitoring of liquidity risk over an appropriate set of time
       horizons, including intraday, to ensure that it maintains adequate liquidity
       buffers. 14
(ii)   In addition to an adequate quantitative framework for assessing liquidity
       adequacy, a qualitative framework needs to ensure that liquidity adequacy is
       actively managed. This includes the monitoring of liquidity adequacy metrics to
       identify and assess potential threats over different time horizons, including
12
     For example, the funding plan is expected to be subject to back-testing in accordance with the
     requirements of the EBA Guidelines on harmonised definitions and templates for funding plans of credit
     institutions under Recommendation A4 of ESRB/2012/2.
13
     The EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) describe in more detail the allocation of
     tasks and responsibilities between the supervisory and management functions of the management
     body.
14
     For a description of internal liquidity buffers and internal stable sources of funding, see Principle 5.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                          7

       intraday, in a timely manner, drawing practical conclusions and taking
       preventive action to ensure that regulatory and internal liquidity buffers remain
       adequate.
(iii) The quantitative and qualitative aspects of the ILAAP are expected to be
       consistent with each other and with the institution’s business strategy and risk
       appetite. The ILAAP is expected to be integrated into the business, decision-
       making and risk management processes of the institution. The ILAAP is
       expected to be consistent and coherent throughout the group.
(iv) Institutions are expected to maintain a sound and effective overall ILAAP
       architecture and documentation of the interplay between the ILAAP elements
       and the integration of the ILAAP into the institution’s overall management
       framework.
(v)    The ILAAP is expected to support strategic decision-making and, at the same
       time, be operationally aimed at ensuring that the institution maintains adequate
       liquidity on an ongoing basis, thereby promoting an appropriate relationship
       between risks and rewards. All methods and processes used by the institution
       to steer its liquidity as part of the operational or strategic liquidity management
       process are expected to be approved, thoroughly reviewed, and properly
       included in the ILAAP and its documentation.
The ILAAP as an integral part of an institution’s management
framework
24. In order to assess and maintain adequate liquidity to cover the institution’s
       risks, 15 the internal processes and arrangements are expected to ensure that
       quantitative analysis of risks, as reflected in the ILAAP, is integrated into all
       material business activities and decisions.
25. This integration may be achieved by using the ILAAP for, for example, the
       strategic planning process at group level, monitoring liquidity adequacy
       indicators to identify and assess potential threats in a timely manner, drawing
       practical conclusions and taking preventive action, determining liquidity
       allocation, and ensuring the ongoing effectiveness of the risk appetite
       framework (RAF).
26. ILAAP-based risk-adjusted performance indicators 16 are expected to be used in
       the decision-making process, and, for example, when determining variable
       remuneration or when discussing business and risks at all levels of the
       institution, including, inter alia, in asset and liability management committees,
       risk committees and meetings of the management body.
15
     The general expectations regarding the quantitative part of the ILAAP are introduced under Principle 3.
16
   Examples of such indicators can be found in the EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration policies under
     Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and disclosures under Article 450 of Regulation (EU)
     No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2015/22).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                       8

The overall ILAAP architecture
27. The management body is responsible for maintaining a sound and effective
      overall ILAAP architecture, ensuring that the different elements of the ILAAP fit
      coherently together and that the ILAAP is an integral part of the institution’s
      overall management framework. The institution is expected to have a clear view
      of how these elements are consistently integrated into an effective overall
      process that allows it to maintain liquidity adequacy over time.
28. For this purpose, the institution is expected to maintain as part of its ILAAP
      documentation a description of the overall ILAAP architecture, for example an
      overview of the key elements of the ILAAP and how they work together,
      explaining how the ILAAP is integrated into the institution’s functioning and how
      its outcomes are used in the institution. This ILAAP architecture description is
      expected to explain the high-level structure of the ILAAP, how its outcomes are
      used in decision-making, and the connections between, for example, business
      and risk strategies, funding plans, risk identification processes, the risk appetite
      statement, limit systems, risk quantification methodologies, the stress-testing
      programme and management reporting.
Management reporting
29. The ILAAP is an ongoing process. The institution is expected to integrate ILAAP
      outcomes (such as how material risks, key indicators, etc. are evolving) into its
      internal reporting to different managerial levels at appropriate frequencies. The
      frequency of reporting to the management body is expected to be at least
      quarterly, but, depending on the size, complexity, business model and risk types
      of the institution, reporting might need to be more frequent to ensure timely
      management action, given the potentially rapid changes in the liquidity and
      funding situation and the immediate impact that an inadequate liquidity position
      could have on the continuity of the institution.
The ILAAP and the risk appetite framework 17
30. The RAF of the institution is expected to formalise the interplay between the
      RAF and other strategic processes such as the ICAAP, the ILAAP, the recovery
      plan and the remuneration framework in accordance with the SSM supervisory
      statement on governance and risk appetite. A well-developed RAF, articulated
      through the risk appetite statement, is expected to be closely interlinked with
      the ILAAP and a cornerstone of sound risk and liquidity management.
17
   Further explanations and guidance can be found in the SSM supervisory statement on governance and
   risk appetite, ECB, June 2016, and in the Principles for An Effective Risk Appetite Framework,
   Financial Stability Board, November 2013.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles               9

31. In its risk appetite statement, the institution is expected to set out both a clear
     and unambiguous view on and intended actions with regard to its risks in line
     with its business strategy. In particular, the statement is expected to include
     motivations for taking on or avoiding certain types of risks, products or regions.
     Furthermore, the institution is expected to widen the monitoring of the liquidity
     risks to other metrics than the regulatory ones and to select a diversified set of
     metrics proportionate to its business model and risk profile.
32. The institution’s overall risk profile is expected to ultimately be constrained and
     driven by the group-wide RAF and its implementation. Furthermore, the RAF is
     a critical element of the institution’s strategy development and implementation
     process. In a structured manner, the RAF links risks taken to the institution’s
     liquidity adequacy and strategic objectives. As part of the RAF, the institution is
     expected to determine and take into account its management buffers.
33. The institution is expected to clearly express how the implementation and
     monitoring of its strategy and risk appetite are supported by its ILAAP, and how
     this effectively allows it to comply with the agreed risk boundaries set out in the
     risk appetite statement. In order to facilitate sound and effective risk
     management, the institution is expected to use the ILAAP outcomes when
     setting up an effective risk monitoring and reporting system and an adequately
     granular limit system (including effective escalation procedures) that allocates
     specific limits to, for example, individual risks, sub-risks, entities and business
     areas, promoting the risk appetite statement of the group.
34. The institution is expected to have a policy in place regarding the use of public
     funding sources. 18 Such policies are expected to differentiate between the use
     of such sources during business as usual and during times of stressed
     conditions and be explicitly considered in the risk appetite (timing and amount)
     and liquidity adequacy statements. The actual and potential future use of such
     sources is expected to be monitored. This monitoring is expected to take place
     in all material currencies. In order to quantify both the timing and the amount of
     potential future use of such sources stress testing is expected to be used.
Consistency between ILAAPs and recovery plans
35. A recovery plan aims at providing measures to be taken by the institution to
     restore its financial position following a significant deterioration. Since
     insufficient liquidity is one of the key threats to business continuity/viability, the
     ILAAP and the recovery plan are expected to be parts of the same risk
     management continuum. While the ILAAP is aimed at maintaining the continuity
     of an institution (within its strategy and intended business model) recovery
18
   The EBA Guidelines on harmonised definitions and templates for funding plans of credit institutions
   under Recommendation A4 of ESRB/2012/2 (EBA/GL/2014/04) define public funding sources as
   “sources of funding that are either directly or indirectly provided by the public sector. This includes
   medium- and long-term repo financing programmes, credit guarantee funding programmes and credit
   guarantee real economy support programmes”. (This includes for example the ECB’s longer-term
   refinancing operations, or LTROs.)
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                       10

      plans set out measures (including extraordinary measures) to restore its
      financial position following a significant deterioration.
36.    Accordingly, institutions are expected to ensure consistency and coherence
      between their ILAAPs, on the one hand, and their recovery plans and
      arrangements (e.g. thresholds for early warning signals and recovery indicators,
      escalation procedures, and potential management actions 19) on the other.
      Moreover, potential ILAAP management actions with material impact are
      expected to be reflected without delay in the recovery plan, and vice versa, to
      ensure that the processes and the information included in related documents
      are consistent and up to date.
Consistency and coherence across groups
37. The ILAAP is expected to ensure liquidity adequacy at relevant levels of
      consolidation and for applicable entities of the group, as required by Article 109
      CRD IV. In order to be able to effectively assess and maintain liquidity
      adequacy across entities, the strategies, risk management processes, decision-
      making and the methodologies and assumptions applied when quantifying
      liquidity and funding need to be coherent across the relevant perimeter.
38. Where national ILAAP provisions or guidance differ for certain entities or sub-
      groups, their implementation “on those levels of the group or sub-group may
      require diverging approaches to a certain degree. However, institutions are
      expected to ensure that this does not interfere with the effectiveness and
      consistency of the ILAAP on each relevant level, with a special focus on the
      group level.
39. In the case of cross-border operations facing differences in local liquidity (risk
      management) requirements, the ILAAP at the highest level of consolidation is
      expected to make it clear what local differences in regulation are relevant. In
      general, the expectation is that such differences in regulation will only affect the
      details of implementation, such as stress test parameters, sign-off and
      reporting, etc., and will not compromise consistency in the general approach to
      the ILAAP. The institution is also expected to assess impediments to liquidity
      transferability in a conservative and prudent manner and take them into account
      in its ILAAP.
Example 2.1:
Risk adjusted performance measurement
A bank incorporates liquidity costs, benefits and risks into the internal pricing, funds
transfer pricing (FTP), performance measurement and new product approval process
19
    However, where there are differences in the principles underlying the ILAAP and recovery planning, the
    envisaged management actions may be different.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                    11

for all significant business activities (both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet),
thereby aligning the risk-taking incentives of individual business lines with the
liquidity risk exposures their activities create for the institution as a whole.
This is supported by the implementation of a sound ILAAP governance framework
and architecture as described under Principle 1.
Example 2.2:
Consistency between ILAAP and recovery plan
To ensure the overall consistency of recovery and ILAAP arrangements, institutions
are expected to be consistent across the continuum of potential liquidity impacts and
corresponding management actions in their ILAAPs and their recovery plans. More
specifically, this means, for example, that liquidity indicators used in the recovery
plan for identifying significant actual and likely future deteriorations in the quantity
and quality of liquidity are expected to be consistently taken into account in the
ILAAP. More specifically, under normal circumstances liquidity levels are expected to
be managed via the ILAAP so as to stay above the thresholds for liquidity
indicators 20 in the recovery plan by a prudent margin.
Likewise, the management actions in the ILAAP and the recovery plan are also
expected to be consistent: where an institution assumes similar actions in its
recovery plan and in its ILAAP, this could lead to an overestimation of the
effectiveness of recovery options in the calculation of the overall recovery capacity if
some of them have already been used under the ILAAP. Therefore, in order to avoid
overlaps between recovery options and ILAAP management actions, which might
lead to “double-counting”, material management actions taken under the ILAAP are
expected to be reflected without delay in a re-assessment of the feasibility and
effectiveness of the recovery options included in the recovery plan. 21
For instance, the capacity of an institution to raise funding in a recovery situation
may be severely affected if the institution has already raised funding under its ILAAP
in a situation that does not fall under the recovery plan. This could impact the types
and volume of extra funding that could be raised as well as the specification of
issuance conditions.
Another connection between ILAAPs and recovery plans is reverse stress testing.
This instrument is expected to be used by institutions as part of their ILAAPs to
assess which scenarios would bring them into a situation that would threaten their
ability to pursue their intended business model (and therefore their ILAAP
objectives). In the context of recovery planning, “reverse stress testing should be
considered as a starting point for developing scenarios that should be only ‘near-
default’; i.e. they would lead to an institution’s or a group’s business model becoming
20
    More details on this can be found in the EBA Guidelines on the minimum list of qualitative and
    quantitative recovery plan indicators (EBA/GL/2015/02).
21
    See also the ECB Report on recovery plans, July 2018, for more details.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles               12

non-viable unless the recovery actions were successfully implemented.” 22 Moreover,
scenarios in both ILAAPs and recovery plans should be based on events that are
particularly relevant to the institutions and address their key vulnerabilities.
Principle 3 – The ILAAP contributes fundamentally to the
continuity of the institution by ensuring its liquidity
adequacy from different perspectives
(i)    The ILAAP plays a key role in maintaining the continuity of the institution by
       ensuring its adequate liquidity and funding position. In order to ensure this
       contribution to its continuity, the institution is expected to implement a
       proportionate ILAAP that is prudent and conservative and integrates two
       complementary internal perspectives.
(ii)   The institution is expected to implement an economic perspective, under which
       it is expected to identify and quantify all material risks that may negatively affect
       its internal liquidity position.
(iii) Under the economic perspective, the institution is expected to ensure that any
       risks that may affect its liquidity position are adequately covered by internal
       liquidity in line with its internal liquidity adequacy concept. This includes the
       assessment of a credible baseline scenario and adequate, institution-specific
       adverse scenarios, as reflected in the multi-year liquidity and funding planning
       and in line with the overall planning objectives of the institution.
(iv) The institution is expected to implement a normative perspective which is an
       assessment of the institution’s ability to fulfil all of its liquidity-related regulatory
       and supervisory requirements and demands and to cope with other external
       financial constraints on an ongoing basis in the medium term.
(v)    The institution is expected to have a formal liquidity contingency plan (LCP) that
       clearly sets out the measures for addressing liquidity difficulties under stressed
       circumstances. The LCP is expected to address the risks identified in the
       institution’s ILAAP and to set out the relationship with its recovery plan.
Objective: to contribute to the continuity of the institution
40. The objective of the ILAAP is to contribute to the institution’s continuity from a
       liquidity perspective by ensuring that it has sufficient liquidity to fulfil its
       obligations when they fall due, to bear its risks and follow a sustainable
       strategy, even during a prolonged period of adverse developments. The
       institution is expected to reflect this continuity objective in its RAF (as specified
       under Principle 2) and to use the ILAAP framework to reassess its risk appetite
22
     See paragraph 11 of the EBA Guidelines on the range of scenarios to be used in recovery plans
     (EBA/GL/2014/06).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles               13

        and tolerance thresholds within its overall liquidity constraints, taking into
        account its risk profile and vulnerabilities.
41. Within these liquidity constraints, the institution is expected to assess and
        define 23 management buffers above the regulatory and supervisory minima 24
        and internal liquidity needs that allow it to sustainably follow its strategy. When
        aiming for sufficient management buffers over the short-term horizon, the
        institution is expected to take into account, for example, the expectations of
        markets, investors and counterparties and the reliance of the business model
        on the ability to pay out bonuses, dividends and payments on Additional Tier 1
        (AT1) instruments. In addition to such external constraints, the management
        buffers are expected, for example, to cushion uncertainties around projections
        of, and possible resulting fluctuations in, liquidity ratios, to reflect the institution’s
        risk appetite and to allow it some flexibility in its business decisions.
Figure 1
The ILAAP contributes to the continuity of the institution
  Economic environment
                                                           Adequate
                                                            capital
                                                           (ICAAP)
  Business strategy                            CONTINUITY OF THE INSTITUTION                 Competitive position
                                                           Adequate
                                                            liquidity
                                                            (ILAAP)
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
Economic internal perspective
42. The institution is expected to manage its liquidity adequacy from the economic
        perspective by ensuring that its risks and expected outflows are adequately
        covered by internal liquidity taking into account the expectations of Principle 5.
23
     In this Guide, management buffers do not refer to available liquidity (“headroom”). Rather, they reflect
     the institution’s view on the liquidity it needs to sustainably follow its business model.
24
     The management buffer concept does not actually set new minimum liquidity requirements above the
     existing legal minima. Although it is generally expected that management buffers will be larger than
     zero, in theory an institution may also be able to argue that, depending on the scenario assessed, a
     management buffer of zero would still allow it to sustainably follow its business model.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                           14

     Economic liquidity adequacy requires the internal liquidity of the institution to be
     sufficient to cover its risks and expected outflows and to support its strategy on
     an ongoing basis. Under this perspective, the institution’s assessment is
     expected to cover the full universe of risks that may have a material impact on
     its liquidity position, taking into account cash flows and the applicable liquidity
     value of liquid assets. The institution is expected to manage economic risks and
     adequately assess them in its stress-testing programme and its monitoring of
     liquidity adequacy.
43. The institution is expected to use its own processes and methodologies to
     identify, quantify, and provide internal liquidity for the expected and unexpected
     outflows that it might be subject to, taking into account the principle of
     proportionality. The institution is expected to perform a point-in-time risk
     quantification of the current situation as at the reference date. This is expected
     to be complemented by a forward-looking liquidity adequacy assessment for the
     medium term that takes into account future developments, like changes in the
     external environment. Institutions are expected to capture at least three years
     for the funding position and an appropriate time horizon for the liquidity position.
44. For this purpose, in addition to assessing the available liquidity against liquidity
     needs in its daily operations and funding planning under a baseline scenario,
     the institution is expected to also consider adverse scenarios. 25 Where relevant,
     the assumptions used are expected to be consistent with the recovery plan.
45. The institution is expected to use the outcomes and metrics of the economic
     liquidity adequacy assessment in its strategic and operational management,
     when reviewing its risk appetite in its interactions with clients (stopping new
     business, enforcing repayment at contract date without refinancing, etc.) and
     markets (fire sales and other actions that affect market perception when
     executed) and when reviewing its business strategies. In addition to prudent
     internal liquidity buffers definition 26 and risk quantification, the institution is
     expected to present an economic liquidity adequacy concept that enables it to
     remain economically viable and follow its strategy. This includes management
     processes to identify in a timely manner the need for action to overcome
     emerging internal liquidity deficiencies and to take effective measures (e.g.
     increasing liquidity buffers, changing the cash flow profile).
Normative internal perspective
46. The normative perspective is a multi-year assessment of the institution’s ability
     to fulfil all of its liquidity-related (quantitative) regulatory and supervisory
     requirements and demands, and to cope with other external financial
     constraints, on an ongoing basis.
25
   The severity of adverse scenarios is discussed further under Principle 7.
26
   Expectations regarding the internal liquidity buffers are introduced under Principle 5.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles       15

47. The normative perspective is expected to take into account all aspects that
      could affect relevant regulatory ratios, including inflows, outflows and liquidity
      buffers, over the planning period. Therefore, although its outcomes are
      expressed in regulatory metrics, the normative perspective is not limited by the
      assumptions underlying the calculation of the Pillar 1 ratios. Rather, when
      assessing its liquidity adequacy under the normative perspective, the institution
      is expected to take into account the assumptions it uses under the economic
      perspective when calculating the Pillar 1 ratio 27, as explained in Example 3.1.
48. The institution is expected to maintain a robust, up-to-date liquidity and funding
      plan that is compatible with its strategies, risk appetite and liquidity resources.
      The liquidity and funding plan is expected to comprise baseline and adverse
      scenarios, and to cover a forward-looking horizon capturing at least three
      years 28 for the funding position 29 and an appropriate time horizon for the
      liquidity position. When preparing those projections the institution is expected to
      account for the economic situation as reflected in the economic perspective.
      The institution is expected to also take into account the impact of upcoming
      changes in legal, regulatory, and accounting frameworks 30 and make an
      informed and reasoned decision on how to address them in the liquidity and
      funding planning.
49. To assess the expected evolution of key normative and economic internal
      metrics under adverse developments in ongoing business expectations, the
      institution needs to assess the level of these metrics under adverse conditions
      against internal thresholds as defined in the risk appetite statement. This does
      not mean that the institution needs to comply with the liquidity coverage ratio
      (LCR) under severe stress conditions. However, it does mean that it is expected
      to present a concept that enables it to remain viable and pursue its strategy,
      e.g. by taking concrete action (change in liquidity profile) as a result of the
      projections it has made. This also implies that the institution is expected to
      monitor the potential decline in the LCR under such conditions and link this to
      its risk appetite, LCP and recovery plan.
Interaction between the economic and the normative perspectives
50. Figure 2 gives an overview of the aspects, measures and outcomes that are
      expected to be taken into account under the economic and normative
27
   The same logic applies when calculating ratios imposed by the competent authority as part of SREP
   decisions (e.g. the minimum survival period).
28
   It is the responsibility of the institution to choose an adequate planning horizon – three years is the
   minimum horizon that a detailed funding plan is expected to capture. Institutions are also expected to
   take developments beyond this minimum horizon into account in their strategic planning, in a
   proportionate manner, if they will have a material impact.
29
   It is also possible to integrate the liquidity and funding plans into a single document.
30
   Depending on the likelihood and potential impact of particular changes, different treatment may be
   applied by the institution. For instance, some changes may seem highly unlikely, but would have such a
   huge impact that the institution is expected to prepare contingency measures. Other, more likely
   regulatory changes, however, are expected to be captured in the liquidity and funding plan itself. An
   example is the implementation of the net stable funding ratio (NSFR).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                       16

             perspectives for the assessment of both the liquidity and the funding position.
             Although the calculations of the projections under the normative perspective
             mechanically follow Pillar 1 provisions, the institution nonetheless is expected to
             form an internal view on the scenarios used and on the impacts of those
             scenarios on projected Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 figures. Under the economic
             perspective, it is expected to also select adequate scenarios and determine the
             impact on the respective projections. In addition, under the economic
             perspective it is also expected to determine adequate assumptions and
             measures for all supply, demand and surplus-relevant calculation
             methodologies. The differences in methodologies, measures and assumptions
             used can lead to very different outcomes of the assessments between the two
             perspectives, even if the same scenario is applied.
51. The same is true with regard to management actions taken into account in
    liquidity or funding planning under the two perspectives. Moreover, such
    differences can even occur within the same perspective, depending on the
    scenario assessed. Figure 2 shows that the same management actions may
    have materially different impacts, depending on the perspective and the
    scenario considered. The institution is expected to take this into account in its
    liquidity and funding planning and ensure that the management action
    assumptions under the different perspectives are consistent with each other.
Figure 2
Different impacts of credible management actions, depending on the perspectives
and scenarios considered – illustrative example
                                                 Economic internal perspective
                                          •    Cash reserves, liquid asset portfolio,          Projections
             Projections                       unencumbered assets, stable funding             • Survival period ...
             • Survival period ...             sources and liquidity inflows, all from         • Maturity mismatch….
             • Maturity mismatch….             economic perspective (supply)                   • Other internal metrics…
             • Other internal metrics…
                                          •    Liquidity outflows from an economic             … under assumed
             … under expected future           perspective (demand)                            adverse future
             developments, after
                                                                                               developments, after
             management actions
                                                                                               management actions
  Baseline                                                                                                                 Adverse
                                                    Credible management actions
                                              e.g. increase liquid assets, increase stable
                                                                 funding
                                                                                               Projections
             Projections
                                                                                               • LCR …
             • LCR …
                                                                                               • Other regulatory or
             • Other regulatory or
                                                                                                 supervisory ratios …
               supervisory ratios …       •    Available regulatory highly liquid assets and
                                               available stable funding (supply)               … under assumed
             … under expected future
                                          •    Regulatory outflows and stable funding          adverse future
             developments, after
                                               requirements (demand)                           developments, after
             management actions
                                                                                               management actions
                                                Normative internal perspective
Figures and dimensions are for illustrative purposes only.
52.           If the institution assumes management actions in its liquidity and funding plan,
             it is expected to assess the feasibility and expected impact of such actions
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                                       17

      under the respective scenarios, and to be transparent about the quantitative
      impact of each action on projected figures.
53. The economic and normative perspectives are expected to mutually inform
      each other and be integrated into all material business activities and decisions
      as outlined under Principle 2.
54. In addition to measuring its current ability to fulfil liquidity obligations, the
      institution is expected to have a clear and concise plan on how to act when
      (unexpected) difficulties arise in meeting obligations as they fall due. The ILAAP
      is therefore expected to contain detailed information on liquidity contingency
      measures (in the form of an LCP) that can be taken, including an assessment of
      the potential contingent liquidity that can be generated during stress, the time
      the measures would take to execute, potential negative effects (on profit and
      loss account, reputation, business model viability, etc.) and the likelihood of
      completion of the measures under stressed conditions. Such liquidity
      contingency measures are expected to be consistent with the risks identified
      and quantified in the ILAAP. The institution is expected to make clear (in its
      ILAAP architecture) the relationship between the LCP and the liquidity part of
      the recovery plan and how these relate to the risks identified on an ongoing
      basis as described above and under stress circumstances.
Example 3.1
The economic perspective informs the normative perspective
Under the economic perspective, the institution assesses outflows from different
types of products using its internal approaches.
For example, under the economic perspective the institution has a comprehensive
approach for identifying retail deposits subject to higher outflow rates (“less stable
retail deposits”) and calculating the respective outflow rates 31.
These outcomes are used in the estimation of liquidity buffers under the economic
perspective. In addition, this information is used to quantify the 30-day outflow rate
under the normative perspective. In doing so, the institution makes use of all
available information from the economic perspective when calculating the LCR.
Principle 4 – All material risks are identified and taken
into account in the ILAAP
(i)   The institution is responsible for implementing a regular process for identifying
      all material risks it is or might be exposed to under the economic and normative
31
    Subject to Article 25(2) and (3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2015/61 of 10 October
    2014 to supplement Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council with
    regard to liquidity coverage requirement for Credit Institutions (OJ L 11, 17.1.2015, p. 1).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                18

       perspectives. All risks identified as material are expected to be addressed in all
       parts of the ILAAP in accordance with an internally defined risk taxonomy.
(ii)   Taking a comprehensive approach, including all relevant legal entities, business
       lines and exposures, the institution is expected to identify at least annually risks
       that are material using its own internal definition of materiality. This risk
       identification process is expected to result in a comprehensive internal risk
       inventory.
(iii) In the case of financial and non-financial participations, subsidiaries, and other
       connected entities, the institution is expected to identify the significant
       underlying risks that it is or may be exposed to and take them into account in its
       ILAAP.
(iv) For all risks identified as material, the institution is expected either to cover the
       risk with sufficient liquidity or to document the justification for not holding the
       liquidity.
Risk identification process
55. The institution is expected to implement a regular process for identifying all
       material risks and include them in a comprehensive internal risk inventory.
       Using its internal definition of materiality, it is expected to ensure that the risk
       inventory is kept up to date. In addition to regular updates (at least yearly), it is
       expected to adjust the inventory whenever it no longer reflects the risks that are
       material, e.g. because a new product has been introduced or certain business
       activities have been expanded.
56. The risk identification is expected to be comprehensive and take both normative
       and economic perspectives into account. In addition to its current risks, the
       institution is expected to consider in its forward-looking liquidity adequacy
       assessments any risks, and any concentrations within and between those
       risks 32, that may arise from pursuing its strategies or from relevant changes in
       its operating environment.
57. The risk identification process is expected to follow a “gross approach”, i.e.
       without taking into account specific techniques designed to mitigate the
       underlying risks. The institution is then expected to assess the effectiveness of
       these mitigating actions 33.
58. In line with the EBA Guidelines on limits on exposures to shadow banking
       entities (EBA/GL/2015/20), the institution is expected, as part of its risk
       identification approach, to identify its exposures to shadow banking entities, all
32
     This refers to intra-risk and inter-risk concentrations.
33
     The “gross approach” explained here refers to the risk identification process. Institutions are not
     expected to disregard mitigating actions when they determine how much liquidity they need to cover
     their risks.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                     19

    potential risks arising from those exposures, and the potential impact of those
    risks.
59. The management body is responsible for deciding which risk types are to be
    considered material, and which material risks are to be covered by liquidity. This
    includes a justification of why a certain risk the institution is exposed to is not
    considered material.
Risk inventory
60. When determining its internal risk inventory, the institution is responsible for
    defining its own internal risk taxonomy. It is expected not to simply adhere to a
    regulatory risk taxonomy.
61. In its risk inventory, the institution is expected to take into account the
    underlying risks, where material, stemming from its financial and non-financial
    participations, subsidiaries and other connected entities (for example,
    intragroup risk, reputational and operational risks, risks stemming from letters of
    comfort, etc.).
62. In a proportionate way, the institution is expected to look beyond participation
    risks and identify, understand and quantify significant underlying risks, and take
    them into account in its internal risk taxonomy, regardless of whether the
    entities concerned are included in the prudential perimeter or not. The depth of
    the analysis of the underlying risks is expected to be commensurate with the
    business activity and the risk management approach.
63. The institution is expected to look at all relevant products, clients, contracts
    (triggers) from a maturity and behavioural perspective for the different time
    horizons considered, including intraday. Such risks may, for example, stem from
    increased outflows, reduced inflows or reduced liquidity value of liquid assets.
    Both on- and off-balance-sheet items are expected to be considered in this
    regard, including contingent liquidity impacts from collateral calls and margin
    calls owing to market movements or a reduction in own creditworthiness
    (including voluntary buy-backs of own debt to ensure market access in the
    future).
64. One example is innovative funding instruments with call options that amend the
    maturity of the funding (not limited to evergreen deposits and repos) which need
    to be identified and captured as a source of possible contingent liquidity risk.
    Another is collateral swaps that can influence the size and composition of the
    stock of liquid assets; any potential risk stemming from such transactions is
    expected to be clearly identified and included in the set of risk indicators.
65. In the case of cross-border activities, the ILAAP is expected to include an
    assessment of impediments to the transfer of liquidity between legal entities,
    countries and currencies and quantify the impact of such impediments on the
    availability of liquidity throughout the group.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles    20

66. The ILAAP is expected to ensure a sound process for determining and
       monitoring what currencies are considered material for liquidity risk and/or
       funding risk. The institution is expected to clearly identify any material risks,
       including those stemming from cross-border activities, resulting in liquidity or
       funding risk being (partly) taken in a currency other than the currency of the
       corresponding buffers of liquid assets. Such risks are expected to be quantified
       in the ILAAP both under normal conditions (balance sheet positions and
       currency differences) and under stressed conditions (liquidity value of liquid
       assets in foreign currency versus stressed net outflows in foreign currency) for
       each currency that is considered material.
Principle 5 – The internal liquidity buffers are of high
quality and clearly defined; the internal stable sources of
funding are clearly defined
(i)    The institution is expected to define, assess and maintain internal liquidity
       buffers and stable sources of funding under the economic perspective. The
       definition of internal liquidity buffers is expected to be consistent with the
       economic liquidity adequacy concept and internal risk quantifications of the
       institution 34.
(ii)   The internal liquidity buffers are expected to be of sound quality, and
       determined in a prudent and conservative manner. The institution is expected to
       show clearly, assuming the continuity of its operations, how its internal liquidity
       is available to cover risks, thereby ensuring that continuity.
(iii) The sources of funding are expected to be stable to ensure that business
       operations can also continue in the longer term.
Internal liquidity buffers definition
67. The institution is expected to define which assets and future inflows can be
       considered to be liquidity available for the purpose of assessing its liquidity
       adequacy, taking a prudent and conservative approach. This internal definition
       is expected to be based on the likelihood of the liquidity sources being used to
       obtain liquidity under normal and stressed conditions. An explicit internal view is
       expected to be formed on the desired composition of the buffers of liquid assets
       used to cover liquidity risks. In particular, the institution is expected to
       differentiate between assets that are highly likely to remain liquid during times
       of stress and assets that can only be used to obtain liquidity from central banks.
34
     The CEBS Guidelines on Liquidity Buffers & Survival Periods define the internal liquidity buffer as “the
     excess liquidity available outright to be used in liquidity stress situations within a given short-term
     period”, i.e. the short end of the counterbalancing capacity under a “planned stress” view. Additionally,
     the buffer should be determined in three dimensions: the severity and characteristics of the stress
     scenario, the time horizon fixed as the survival period, and the characteristics of the assets in the
     buffer.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                         21

     Internal limits are expected to be set for both components, with a clear link
     between the target size of the buffers of liquid assets and the liquidity risks that
     could materialise over various time frames, taking into account a time frame of
     at least one year.
Internal stable sources of funding definition
68. For the purposes of assessing its funding sustainability, the institution is
     expected to define which funding sources can be regarded as stable, taking a
     prudent and conservative approach. In order to define this, an explicit internal
     view is expected to be formed on the stickiness of deposits and the
     (behavioural) cash flow profile, taking behavioural assumptions into account.
     The institution is expected to assess the stability of its funding profile,
     accounting for the diversity (or concentration) of funding providers, markets and
     products, and assess its market access in terms of volume and pricing, taking
     into account current asset encumbrance and expected changes in this when
     executing the funding plan.
Principle 6 – ILAAP risk quantification methodologies are
adequate, consistent and independently validated
(i)  The institution is responsible for implementing risk quantification methodologies
     that are adequate for its individual circumstances under both the economic and
     normative perspectives. In addition, the institution is expected to use adequate
     methodologies for quantifying the potential future changes in its liquidity and
     funding position in its adverse scenarios. The institution is expected to apply a
     high level of conservatism under both perspectives to ensure that rare/tail
     events are considered appropriately.
(ii) The key parameters and assumptions are expected to be consistent throughout
     the group and between risk types. All risk quantification methodologies are
     expected to be subject to independent internal validation. The institution is
     expected to establish and implement an effective data quality framework.
Comprehensive risk quantification
69. The ILAAP is expected to ensure that risks that the institution is/may be
     exposed to are adequately quantified. The institution is expected to implement
     risk quantification methodologies that are tailored to its individual circumstances
     (i.e. they are expected to be in line with its risk appetite, market expectations,
     business model, risk profile, size and complexity).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles    22

70. Risks are not expected to be excluded from the assessment because they are
     difficult to quantify or the relevant data are not available. 35 In such cases, the
     institution is expected to determine sufficiently conservative risk figures, taking
     into consideration all relevant information and ensuring adequacy and
     consistency in its choice of risk quantification methodologies. 36
71. The key parameters and assumptions cover, inter alia, confidence levels and
     scenario generation assumptions.
Level of conservatism
72. The risk quantification methodologies and assumptions used under the
     economic and normative perspective are expected to be robust, sufficiently
     stable, risk-sensitive and conservative enough to quantify liquidity outflows that
     occur rarely. Uncertainties arising from risk quantification methodologies are
     expected to be addressed by an increased level of conservatism.
Choice of risk quantification methodologies
73. It is the responsibility of the institution to implement adequate methodologies
     both to quantify its risks and to determine projections. This Guide does not set
     out any expectation regarding using or not using any quantification
     methodology per se This means that there is no predetermination as to
     whether, for example the institution is expected to use (amended) Pillar 1
     methodologies (e.g. to take into account concentration risk), stress test results
     or other methodologies, such as multiple scenarios, to quantify the risks it is or
     may be exposed to.
74. The methodologies used are expected to be consistent with each other, with the
     perspective considered and with the definition of liquidity and stable funding.
     They are expected to capture the risks to which the institution is exposed in an
     adequate and sufficiently conservative manner, taking into account the principle
     of proportionality. This means, for example, that larger or more complex
     institutions, or institutions that have more complex risks, are expected to use
     more sophisticated risk quantification methodologies to capture the risks in an
     adequate manner.
75. However, the institution is not expected to implement risk quantification
     methodologies that it does not fully understand and which, consequently, are
     not used for its own internal risk management and decision-making. The
35
   For risks that are difficult to quantify (e.g. because of missing data or the absence of established
   quantification methodologies), the institution is expected to develop adequate methodologies to
   quantify risks, including using expert judgement.
36
   Risk measurement of difficult to quantify risks should be consistent and comparable, as far as possible,
   with overall risk measurement assumptions. The institution is expected to ensure that such risks are
   appropriately factored into the risk management and risk control processes, regardless of whether they
   are quantified using traditional models or scenario analysis, or informed by other estimates.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                    23

      institution is expected to be able to demonstrate the adequacy of the
      methodologies for its individual situation and risk profile. In the case of vendor
      models, this includes the expectation that such models are not expected to be
      imported mechanistically, but rather they are expected to be fully understood by
      the institution and well-suited for, and tailored to, its business and its risk profile.
Data quality
76. The institution is expected to deploy adequate processes and control
      mechanisms to ensure the quality of data. 37 The data quality framework is
      expected to ensure reliable risk information that supports sound decision-
      making, and it is expected to cover all relevant risk data and data quality
      dimensions.
Independent validation
77. ILAAP risk quantification methodologies are expected to be subject to regular
      independent internal 38 validation, respecting, in a proportionate way, the
      principles underlying the respective standards established for Pillar 1 internal
      models, taking into account the materiality of the risks quantified and the
      complexity of the risk quantification methodology.
78. Depending on the size and complexity of the institution, various organisational
      solutions may be adopted to ensure independence between the development
      and validation of risk quantification methodologies. However, the concepts
      underlying the various lines of defence are expected to be respected; i.e. the
      independent validation is expected to not be conducted by the internal audit
      function.
79. The overall conclusions of the validation process are expected to be reported to
      senior management and the management body, used in the regular review and
      adjustment of the quantification methodologies, and taken into account when
      assessing liquidity adequacy.
37
   Data quality comprises, for example, the completeness, accuracy, consistency, timeliness, uniqueness,
   validity and traceability of the data. For more information, see the draft ECB Guide for the Targeted
   Review of Internal Models (TRIM) of February 2017.
38
   “Internal” does not mean that the institution itself is expected to carry out each and every validation
   activity. As with “internal” audit, this rather refers to the fact that the institution is responsible for this
   process.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                               24

Example 6.1
Organisation of independent validations
In order to ensure the independent and proportionate validation of ILAAP risk
quantification methodologies, the institution is expected to take into consideration the
draft ECB guide to Internal Models – General topics chapter.
Depending on the nature, size, scale and complexity of its risks, the institution may,
for example, employ one of the following three organisational arrangements to
ensure the independence of the validation function from the methodology
development process (i.e. design, development, implementation and monitoring of
the risk quantification methodologies):
•     separation into two different units reporting to different members of the senior
      management;
•     separation into two different units reporting to the same member of the senior
      management;
•     separate staff within the same unit.
Principle 7 – Regular stress testing is aimed at ensuring
liquidity adequacy in adverse circumstances
(i)   The ECB expects the institution to perform a tailored and in-depth review of its
      vulnerabilities, capturing all material risks on an institution-wide basis that result
      from its business model and operating environment in the context of stressed
      macroeconomic and financial conditions on a yearly basis and more frequently,
      when necessary, depending on the individual circumstances. On the basis of
      this review, the institution is expected to define an adequate stress-testing
      programme for both normative and economic perspectives.
(ii)  As part of the stress-testing programme, the institution is expected to determine
      adverse scenarios to be used under both perspectives, taking into account
      other stress tests it conducts. The application of severe, but plausible,
      macroeconomic assumptions and a focus on key vulnerabilities are expected to
      result in a material impact on the institution’s internal and regulatory liquidity
      position. In addition, the institution is expected to conduct reverse stress testing
      in a proportionate manner.
(iii) The institution is expected to continuously monitor and identify new threats,
      vulnerabilities and changes in the environment to assess at least quarterly
      whether its stress testing scenarios remain appropriate and, if not, adapt them
      to the new circumstances. The impact of the scenarios is expected to be
      updated regularly (e.g. quarterly). In the case of material changes, the
      institution is expected to assess their potential impact on its liquidity adequacy
      over the course of the year.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles     25

Determination of the stress-testing programme
80. The stress-testing programme is expected to cover both the normative and the
    economic perspective. It is expected to capture different time horizons
    (including intraday), and take the relevant currency split into account. When
    defining the set of internal stress scenarios and sensitivities, the institution is
    expected to use a broad set of information on historical and hypothetical stress
    events. It is the institution’s own responsibility to define scenarios and
    sensitivities in the manner that best addresses its individual situation and to
    translate them into liquidity inflows and outflows and applicable liquidity values
    of liquid assets. The normative perspective is expected to be covered under the
    stress-testing programme in such a way that the impact of the stress events on
    the evolution of the projected regulatory ratios such as the LCR is analysed at
    various points in time, in line with paragraph 46.
81. When defining stress testing scenarios, institutions are expected to capture
    their material vulnerabilities, given their individual business model, risk profile
    and the external conditions they face. Other stress tests conducted, e.g.
    sensitivity analysis, are expected to inform the scenarios used by revealing the
    material vulnerabilities of the institution.
82. As liquidity transferability can be very different during periods of stress when
    compared with normal times, an institution with significant cross-border
    activities is expected to assess the transferability of liquidity within the group
    and take this into account in its stress-testing programme. It is expected to;
    analyse the impact and likelihood of additional impediments to liquidity
    transferability under stressed conditions, in particular for operations outside the
    euro area; and to identify remedial actions and contingency measures for such
    a scenario.
Severity level of adverse scenarios
83. In its baseline assessment, the institution is expected to assume developments
    that it would assume under expected circumstances, taking into account its
    business strategy, including credible assumptions regarding inflows and
    outflows, risk materialisations, etc.
84. In adverse scenarios, the institution is expected to assume exceptional, but
    plausible developments with an adequate degree of severity in terms of their
    impact on its liquidity position. The level of severity is expected to correspond to
    developments that are plausible, but as severe from the institution’s perspective
    as any stress event that might be observed during a crisis situation in the
    markets, factors or areas that are most relevant for the institution’s liquidity
    adequacy.
85. The range of adverse scenarios is expected to adequately cover severe
    economic downturns, severe market disruptions and financial shocks, relevant
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles    26

      institution-specific vulnerabilities, reliance on major funding providers, and
      plausible combinations of these 39.
Coherence versus targeting key vulnerabilities
86. In stress testing, the institution is expected to focus on its key vulnerabilities
      when attempting to define plausible adverse scenarios. ICAAP and ILAAP
      stress tests are expected to inform each other; i.e. the underlying assumptions,
      stress test results and projected management actions are expected to be
      mutually taken into account. For instance, if the ILAAP stress tests apply a
      stress event to the credit spread or ratings of assets in the liquidity buffer, the
      impact shall be considered in ICAAP stress tests and vice versa.
Reverse stress testing
87. In addition to stress-testing activities that assess the impact of certain
      assumptions on its liquidity position, the institution is expected to conduct
      reverse stress-testing assessments. These assessments are expected to start
      from the identification of the pre-defined outcome, such as the business model
      becoming unviable 40.
88. Such reverse stress tests are expected to be used to challenge the
      comprehensiveness and conservatism of the ILAAP framework assumptions.
      Reverse stress tests are expected to be conducted at least once a year.
      Depending on the likelihood of the resulting scenarios, it may be necessary to
      immediately address the scenarios by taking or preparing management actions
      in the ILAAP in order to prevent a recovery situation that would occur if one or
      more of the reverse stress testing scenarios assessed in the ILAAP were to
      become reality. Moreover, reverse stress testing in the ILAAP context could be
      seen as a starting point for developing recovery plan scenarios 41. More details
      can be found in the relevant EBA guidelines and BCBS guidance.
Example 7.1
Interaction between ICAAP and ILAAP stress tests
The institution is expected to assess the potential impact of relevant scenarios,
integrating capital and liquidity impacts and potential feedback loops, taking into
39
    The number of scenarios that is adequate for an institution depends on, among other things, its
    individual risk profile. It is expected that several adverse scenarios will usually be necessary to
    adequately reflect the different plausible combinations of risks.
40
    See the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04).
41
    As outlined in the EBA Guidelines on the range of scenarios to be used in recovery plans
    (EBA/GL/2014/06), these scenarios are expected to be only “near-default”, i.e. they are expected to
    lead to an institution’s or group’s business model becoming non-viable unless the recovery actions are
    successfully implemented.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles                    27

account, in particular, losses arising from the liquidation of assets or increases in
funding costs during periods of stress.
Example 7.2
Reverse stress testing
In its internal reverse stress tests, the institution determines the level of deposit
outflows required to exhaust its liquidity buffers and other sources of contingent
funding by determining assumptions on deposit outflows and other risk drivers (e.g.
rating downgrade of the institution, debt-buy-back calls). The outcome of one such
assessment is shown in the table below, illustrating outflow rates for three different
scenarios.
                                        Scenario 1          Scenario 2             Scenario 3
 Deposit outflow assumption
 Retail                                     49%                 7%                     10%
 Corporate                                  33%                 63%                    60%
 Financial                                  62%                 91%                    94%
 Other assumptions (not exhaustive)
 Downgrade                               4 notches           4 notches              4 notches
 Debt buy-back                              0%                  15%                    15%
The institution is expected to determine the probability of such scenarios being
realised and whether any remedial action might be needed.
Example 7.3
Calibration of adverse scenarios
Adverse scenarios take into account historical developments observed in markets
and in client behaviour, but they are not limited to the institution’s own historical client
behaviour and market access. Furthermore, the institution’s scenario design goes
beyond historical observations, in particular where historical evidence is distorted
(e.g. by public sector support). This limits the accuracy of the estimated stress
parameters for in- and outflows and the haircuts applied to the estimated value of
liquid assets.
Such adverse scenarios could include both an ongoing business perspective (normal
operations continue, limited possibility of inflows from the loan book, reliance on
marketable assets mainly to generate liquidity, buy-back of own debt to ensure future
market access, etc.) and scenarios in which a severe disruption of the business
model cannot be avoided (e.g. stop on asset generation, stop on dividend and bonus
payments, using all eligible collateral to obtain liquidity, including central bank
funding, not exercising call options on own debt or equity instruments).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Principles          28

3 Glossary
  Adverse scenario
  A combination of assumed adverse developments in internal and external factors
  (including macroeconomic and financial developments as well as severe market
  disruptions) that is used to assess the resilience of the liquidity adequacy of the
  institution to potential adverse developments over a medium-term horizon. The
  assumed developments in internal and external factors are expected to be combined
  in a consistent way and be severe but plausible from the institution’s perspective,
  reflecting the risks and vulnerabilities that are assessed as representing the most
  pertinent threats to the institution.
  Baseline scenario
  A combination of expected developments in internal and external factors (including
  macroeconomic and financial developments) that is used to assess the impact of
  those expected developments on the liquidity adequacy of the institution. The
  baseline scenario is expected to be consistent with the basis of the institution’s
  business plans and budget.
  Cost-benefit allocation mechanism
  A cost-benefit allocation mechanism allocates liquidity costs, benefits and risks and
  is part of the institution’s strategies, policies, processes and systems.
  Economic internal perspective
  An ILAAP perspective under which the institution manages its liquidity adequacy by
  ensuring that its risks and expected outflows are sufficiently covered by available
  internal liquidity.
  Economic liquidity adequacy concept
  An internal concept aimed at ensuring under the economic perspective that the
  financial resources (internal liquidity) of the institution will enable it to cover its risks
  and expected outflows and to maintain the continuity of its operations on an ongoing
  basis. 42
  Funding planning
  A multidimensional internal process resulting in a funding plan presenting a multi-
  year projection of the funding sources of the institution, taking into account its
  baseline and adverse scenarios, strategy and operational plans. The assessment of
  adverse scenarios is a key element of funding planning as it helps institutions to
  continue operating even under a prolonged period of stress.
  42
      It is the responsibility of the institutions themselves to implement adequate risk quantification
      methodologies – there is no general expectation that institutions will utilise “economic liquidity models”
      to ensure economic liquidity adequacy.
  ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Glossary                          29

Gross approach in risk identification
The gross approach means that risks are first identified without taking into account
specific actions designed to mitigate them.
ILAAP architecture
Different elements of the ILAAP and how they interlink. The ILAAP architecture is
expected to ensure that the different elements of the ILAAP fit together coherently
and that the ILAAP is an integral part of the institution’s overall management
framework. The institution is expected to maintain, as part of its ILAAP
documentation, a description of the overall ILAAP architecture which explains how
the ILAAP is integrated and how its outcomes are used in the institution.
ILAAP outcomes
Any information that results from the ILAAP and adds value to decision-making.
ILAAP
The internal liquidity adequacy assessment process as defined in Article 86 CRD IV,
which requires competent authorities to ensure that institutions have robust
strategies, policies, processes and systems for the identification, measurement,
management and monitoring of liquidity risk over an appropriate set of time horizons,
including intraday, so as to ensure that institutions maintain adequate levels of
liquidity buffers.
Internal review and validation
Internal review covers a broad range of controls, evaluations and reports aimed at
ensuring that ILAAP strategies, processes and models remain sound,
comprehensive, effective and proportionate.
Validation, as part of the internal review, encompasses processes and activities
assessing whether the risk quantification methodologies and risk data of the
institution adequately capture relevant aspects of risk. In a proportionate way, the
validation of risk quantification methodologies is expected to be conducted
independently and respect the principles underlying the respective standards
established for Pillar 1 internal models.
Limit system
A documented and hierarchical system of limits set in line with the overall strategy
and risk appetite of the institution in order to ensure that risks and losses can be
limited effectively in line with the liquidity adequacy concept. The limit system is
expected to lay down effective boundaries for risk taking for, for example, different
risk types, business areas, products and group entities.
Liquidity adequacy statement
A formal statement from the management body providing its assessment of the
liquidity adequacy of the institution and explaining its main supporting arguments.
Liquidity adequacy
The degree to which risks are covered by the institution’s liquidity. The ILAAP is
aimed at maintaining adequate liquidity on an ongoing basis, from both the economic
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Glossary    30

and normative perspectives, contributing to the continuity of the institution over the
medium-term.
Management actions
Actions (for example, raising funding) taken by the management to keep the
liquidity/funding position within the risk appetite) 43.
Management buffer
An amount of liquidity above the regulatory and supervisory minima and internal
liquidity needs that allows the institution to sustainably follow its business model and
to remain flexible regarding possible business opportunities, without endangering its
liquidity adequacy.
Material risk
A liquidity-related downside risk that, based on the institution’s internal definitions,
has a material impact on its overall risk profile, and thus may affect the liquidity
adequacy of the institution.
Medium-term time horizon
A time horizon which captures the near and medium-term future. It is expected to
capture the liquidity position over at least the upcoming year and the funding position
over the upcoming three or more years.
Normative internal perspective
A multi-year ILAAP perspective under which the institution manages its liquidity
adequacy by ensuring that it is able to fulfil all of its liquidity-related legal
requirements and supervisory demands and cope with other internal and external
liquidity constraints on an ongoing basis.
Proportionality
A principle in Article 86 CRD IV which states that the ILAAP shall be proportionate to
the complexity, risk profile, scope of operation of the institution and risk tolerance set
by the management body.
Public funding sources
All sources of funding that are either directly or indirectly provided by the public
sector as defined in Annex 1 to the EBA Guidelines on harmonised definitions and
templates for funding plans of credit institutions under Recommendation A4 of
ESRB/2012/2 (EBA/GL/2014/04).
Recovery plan
A plan drawn up and maintained by an institution in accordance with Article 5 of the
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). 44
43
    For more guidance see the EBA Draft Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04),
    Section 4.8.2 Management actions.
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Glossary                   31

Reverse stress test
A stress test which starts from the identification of the pre-defined outcome (non-
viability of the business model) and then explores scenarios and circumstances that
might cause that outcome to occur.
Risk appetite statement
A formal statement in which the management body expresses its views on the
amounts and types of risk that the institution is willing to take in order to meet its
strategic objectives.
Risk identification process
A regular process the institution uses to identify risks that are or might be material for
the institution.
Risk inventory
A list of identified risks and their characteristics. The risk inventory is the result of the
risk identification process.
Risk quantification
The process of quantifying identified risks by developing and using methodologies to
determine risk figures and enable a comparison between the risks and the available
liquidity of the institution.
Risk taxonomy
A categorisation of different risk types/factors enabling the institution to assess,
aggregate and manage risks in a consistent way through a common risk language
and mapping.
Risk tolerance
The types of risks and levels of those risks that the institution does not intentionally
expose itself to, but accepts/tolerates.
44
    Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a
    framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending
    Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC,
    2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU)
    No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 190).
ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) - Glossary                     32

Abbreviations
AT1           Additional Tier 1
BCBS          Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BRRD          Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive
CRD IV        Capital Requirement Directive
EBA           European Banking Authority
ECB           European Central Bank
ESRB          European Systemic Risk Board
FSB           Financial Stability Board
ICAAP         Internal capital adequacy assessment process
ILAAP         Internal liquidity adequacy assessment process
LAS           Liquidity adequacy statement
LCP           Liquidity contingency plan
LCR           Liquidity coverage ratio
NCA           National competent authority
RAF           Risk appetite framework
SI            Significant institution
SREP          Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process
SSM           Single Supervisory Mechanism
TRIM          Targeted Review of Internal Models
© European Central Bank, 2018
Postal address                      60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Telephone                           +49 69 1344 0
Website                             www.ecb.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

