                                                                                                             ECB-RESTRICTED
  Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena S.p.A.
  Piazza Salimbeni, 3
  53100 Siena
  Italy
  To the attention of the Board
                                                                                                              14 December 2018
Status update on TRIM and outlook for 2019
Dear Sir or Madam,
Further to my previous letter of 31 July 2018, I would like to update you on the status of the ECB’s targeted
review of internal models (TRIM), and in particular on the progress of the ongoing investigations on “low-
                                1
default portfolios” (LDP). Similar to previous communications, the Annex contains an overview of the TRIM
on-site investigations (if any) which are currently planned to start at your institution in the course of 2019. In
addition, I am pleased to inform you about the progress made in the public consultation on the ECB guide to
internal models.
Status update on TRIM and overview of the ongoing LDP investigations
As 2018 draws to a close, we can look back on a year in which important TRIM milestones have been
achieved.
                                                                 2
As explained in previous letters, phase one of TRIM has been successfully completed. We have finalised
about 120 on-site investigations across 15 countries and have started to share the related supervisory
decisions with the institutions.
The second and final phase is now also under way. Phase two of TRIM mainly involves LDP investigations,
which will broadly take place in three progressive waves, starting with “corporates – other”, continuing with
“institutions”, and concluding with “specialised lending”. As in previous TRIM missions, all LDP investigations
are carried out using common inspection techniques and tools to ensure consistency in the assessments by
                                  3
different inspection teams.
The first LDP investigations have benefited from the excellent collaboration of the institutions involved so far.
The on-site phase has already started for approximately 25% of the planned LDP investigations, involving 19
1
  Covering the following exposure classes: corporates (including corporates – other and specialised lending) and institutions.
2
  The TRIM project has two key phases: (i) Phase one ran from 2017 to mid-2018 and involved a review of the models used to
assess the credit risk for retail and small and medium enterprise portfolios, as well as market risk and counterparty credit risk; (ii)
Phase two, which started in the third quarter of 2018 and will continue throughout 2019, mainly focuses on the models used to
assess the credit risk for low-default portfolios. See also:
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/about/ssmexplained/html/trim.en.html
3
  For more information on the different layers of quality assurance embedded in TRIM to ensure consistent results, see the article
on TRIM in the Supervision Newsletter of November 2018:
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/publications/newsletter/2018/html/ssm.nl181114_4.en.html
                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                               ECB-RESTRICTED
institutions in 10 countries. Preparations for on-site work in 2019 are also under way, with more than 50
investigations covering the above-mentioned LDP exposure classes planned for launch in January 2019 and
the following months. For your reference, the Annex provides a list of the TRIM investigations (if any) to be
launched at your institution in 2019.
Update on the public consultation of the ECB guide to internal models
Among the milestones achieved by TRIM in 2018, the public consultation on the ECB guide to internal models
merits special mention. The guide provides transparency on how the ECB understands and intends to apply
EU regulation on internal models and marks a key step towards harmonising supervisory practices within the
Single Supervisory Mechanism.
The public consultation was organised in two phases.
<U+F0B7>    The consultation on the “general topics” chapter was recently finalised with the publication of a revised
                                                                                     4
     version on the ECB Banking Supervision website on 15 November 2018, alongside a feedback statement
     showing how the comments received were taken into account.
<U+F0B7>    The consultation on the remaining “risk-type-specific” chapters (for credit, market and counterparty credit
     risk) was launched on 7 September 2018 and ran to 7 November 2018. The TRIM centres of competence
     are currently assessing the feedback received, with a view to publishing the revised version of the risk-
     type-specific chapters in the first half of 2019.
I would like to thank all bank representatives who took part in the two consultations, either by attending the
public hearings or by submitting written comments. I welcome the industry’s attentive and constructive
response to the guide and the valuable feedback provided across the different chapters.
Next steps
The LDP investigations will continue until the second half of 2019, by which time we plan to have finalised all
on-site activities. We will share additional information on TRIM with the institutions in due course, including
updates on the progress of the LDP investigations and further overviews of the TRIM results to complement
the information already provided to you in our letter of 11 June 2018.
Also on behalf of all staff involved in TRIM, I would like to express once again my appreciation for the
commitment shown by participating institutions so far. Were it not for your continuous efforts, the
achievements reached within TRIM up to now would not have been possible. We look forward to continuing
this collaboration in 2019.
Yours sincerely,
Korbinian lbel
Director General – Directorate General Microprudential Supervision IV
4
  See https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/pdf/ssm.guidegeneraltopics201811.en.pdf
                                                                                                              2

                                                                                              ECB-RESTRICTED
                                ANNEX: Updated simplified SEP 2019
                 JST       Legal entities concerned by                                              Tentative
Reference                                               Purpose
                 Acronym the investigation                                                          launch
                           Banca Monte dei Paschi di    Internal Model Investigation on SSM
TRIM-2019-                 Siena Spa and all affiliated initiative related to Credit risk (PD; LGD;
                 ITMPS                                                                              Q1
ITMPS-3917                 entities and outsourcing     CCF/EAD) for the following exposure
                           service providers            class(es): Corporate - Other
 This document is provided for general information purposes only. The supervisory activities listed therein
 are not exhaustive and may be changed as necessary without prior notice. Information on the tentative
 launch date is also subject to change.
 Please also note that "N/A" indicates that no TRIM investigation is currently planned in 2019.
                                                                                                              3

