
Details of the inspection mission
REFERENCE          OSI-2018-ITMPS-3832
INSTITUTION        Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena – SpA
TOPIC              IT RISK
PURPOSE            IT RISK
HEAD OF MISSION    Donatello Errico, Inspectorate Directorate
TEAM MEMBERS       Giacomo De Luce, Banca d’Italia, Inspectorate Directorate
                   Francesco Abbinante, Banca d’Italia, Inspectorate Directorate
                   (from 02.05.2018 to 15.06.2018)
                   Mario Danza, Banca d’Italia, Inspectorate Directorate
                   Luigi Intonti, Banca d’Italia, Inspectorate Directorate
                   Serena Pulvirenti, Banca d’Italia, IT Department - IT Planning Directorate
                   Giovanni Senese, Banca d’Italia, Banking Supervision 1 Directorate
                   (from 26.03.2018 to 11.05.2018 and from 21.05.2018 to 25.5.2018)
PERIOD OF MISSION  26.03.2018-06.07.2018
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                    Page 2 of 71

Versioning follow up
STEP                                                  DATE
Notification letter of the OSI                        23.02.2018
Kick-off meeting                                      26.03.2018
Start of the on-site field work                       26.03.2018
Location 1 of the on-site inspection                  Siena
Location 2 of the on-site inspection                  Milano
Location 3 of the on-site inspection                  Firenze
End of the on-site fieldwork                          06.07.2018
Draft report sent to the bank before the exit meeting 02.10.2018
Exit meeting with the bank’s management               10.10.2018
Feedback of the bank on the draft report              23.10.2018
Final report                                          12.11.2018
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                              Page 3 of 71

Table of contents
1         Scope and Executive Summary                                   5
1.1       Scope                                                         5
1.2       Executive Summary                                             6
2         Table of findings                                           10
3         Report Details                                              11
3.1       General requirements                                        11
3.2       System architecture                                         32
3.3       IT security management                                      36
3.4       Business continuity management-contingency plans            50
3.5       Data quality management                                     58
4         Detailed table of contents                                  64
5         Table of tables                                             65
6         Table of figures                                            65
7         Annexes                                                     67
7.1       Annex 1 – Abbreviations                                     67
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                          Page 4 of 71

 DG-MS4/COI
                                                                                                  FINAL
                                                                                    OSI-2018-ITMPS-3832
                                                                                       15 November 2018
 Inspection Report
1    Scope and Executive Summary
1.1   Scope
    1  The mission focused on IT risk, in particular on assessing: a) the consistency of the IT
       strategy with the overall business strategy, b) the sustainability of IT system architectures, c)
       the adequacy of IT security and of IT continuity and d) the Data Quality framework. The
       abovementioned objectives took into account the compatibilities of the cost cutting policies
       implemented by the bank. Moreover, the OSI checked the involvement of the management
       bodies regarding the management of the IT systems and processes.
    2  With regards to the mentioned objectives the OSI analysed:
       a) the process of definition of the new IT strategic plan (envisaged in March 2018) and IT
          operational plan. In this context, specific focus was placed on the initiatives to outsource
          the group IT function (so-called Venere project) considering the relevant strategic
          implications;
       b) the consistency of the IT spending with the approved business plan (i.e. the 2017-2021
          Restructuring Plan approved by the European Commission) and with business initiatives
          were evaluated;
       c) the high-level governance process of the IT system architectures aimed at supporting the
          main business processes. The new IT strategic plan was challenged in order to verify the
          alignment with the IT system targets of the Bank;
       d) the management (i.e. policies, processes, and procedures) of IT security, and of IT
          continuity. For these topics, critical incidents were analysed to appraise any structural
          weaknesses;
       e) the effectiveness of data governance projects, as well as the appropriateness of the
          remedial actions in place to overcome already known shortcomings. In this context,
          the Data Quality framework (i.e. based on measurable metrics and KPIs) was analysed to
          assess its maturity grade.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 5 of 71

    3  Against this backdrop, the OSI checked the involvement of the management bodies regarding
       the strategic decisions on the IT systems and processes.
    4  Considering the planned disposal of foreign entities and branches, the OSI concentrated on
       the Italian component and, in particular, on the IT services provided by the Consorzio
       Operativo del Gruppo Monte dei Paschi (hereinafter COG or simply Consortium) to Banca
       Monte dei Paschi di Siena (hereinafter BMPS) and Widiba, the online bank of the Group.
     5 The main legal references are: Directive 2013/36/EU (hereinafter CRD IV); Banca d’Italia
        Circolare no. 285/2013. The BCBS 239 (“Principles for effective risk data aggregation and
        risk reporting“, January 2013), The BCBS-Joint Forum “High-level principles for Business
        Continuity”, NIST Cybersecurity Framework, ITIL (IT Infrastructure Library), ISO/IEC
        27001:2013 “IT - Security techniques - Information security management systems –
        Requirements”.
1.2   Executive Summary
    6  MPS is the fourth largest Italian banking Group in terms of total assets (amounting to € 139.2
       bn as of year-end 2017). The main business is the commercial banking in the domestic
       environment, with a focus on retail. After the failure of a € 5 bn capital raising plan in Q4
       2016, BMPS applied for precautionary recapitalisation in December 2016, which required the
       delivery of a five-year Restructuring Plan, approved by the European Commission on 4 July
       2017. As a consequence, burden sharing measures were implemented, and the Italian
       government subscribed the capital injection requested by ECB.
    7  Table # 1 – BMPS Group main figures at 31.03.2018 (source MPS Planning area)
                                    Key figures                       Value
                     Total assets                                         €136,772 mln
                     of which Loans to customers                           € 89,320 mln
                     Total risk exposure amount                            € 61,781 mln
                     CET1 Capital (actual/fully loaded)        € 8,876 mln / € 7,118 mln
                     Net profit                                              € 187.6 mln
                     Cet1 ratio (actual/fully loaded)                   14.4% / 11.7 %
                     T1 ratio (actual/fully loaded)                     14.4% / 11.7 %
                     Total capital ratio (actual/fully loaded)          15.8% / 13.1 %
                     Leverage ratio                                                4.6%
                     Liquidity coverage ratio                                    195.7%
                     Net stable funding ratio                                      106.0
                     Annualized ROE                                                7.6%
                     NPL ratio (gross/net)                               34.2% / 14.1%
                     NPL ratio after securitization(gross/net)            19.7% / 9.9%
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                          Page 6 of 71

    8     Table # 2 – BMPS main shareholder at 01.07.2017 (source CONSOB web site)
                                       Main shareholder                 Value
                         Ministero Economia e Finanze (MEF)                  68.2%
                         Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.                        4.3%
                         BMPS S.p.A (own equity shares directly held)         3.2%
                                                                                          1
    9     The IT function of the MPS Group is assigned to the internal outsourcer COG that manages
          the overall IT platform of BMPS, MPS Capital Services, and MPS Leasing e Factoring
          (hereinafter MPSCS and MPSLF respectively). Widiba and the foreign banks have their own
          IT functions and systems, and have a functional reporting to the COG through some
          coordination mechanisms (e.g. sharing the IT planning at the beginning of the year) which,
          however, leave a large degree of autonomy on technological choices. Following the
          commitment of the Restructuring Plan, the foreign banks (i.e Montepaschi Banque and Banca
          Montepaschi Belgique) are going to be sold or closed.
    10 The project of Widiba was launched in June 2013, while the bank became active starting from
          the end of 2014. The bank is made up of a digital platform, innovative in the national online
          banking sector, above all for the user experience profile, and it has acquired the network of
          over 600 financial advisors of MPS Group. At the end of 2017, the total assets of Widiba
          amounted to €2.5 bn. Widiba manages the front-end applications (e.g. Web banking,
          smartphone apps and financial advisor channel) and the connected hardware on its own
          account, while using the back-end of the COG.
1
  COG is 99.79% owned by BMPS, with the other MPS Group “Consortium Members” being Widiba S.p.A.
(0.03%), MPS Leasing & Factoring S.p.A. (0.03%), MPS Capital Services S.p.A. (0.06%). Axa Italia Servizi
S.p.A. (0.03%), Axa Assicurazioni Danni S.p.A.(0.03%), Axa Assicurazioni Vita S.p.A. (0.03%) are members
external to the group.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                              Page 7 of 71

   11 Figure # 1 – BMPS Group simplified structure (source IT Strategic Guidelines
      17.04.2018)
   12 According to the Restructuring Plan, the MPS Group has to significantly reduce costs and
      investments. Cost cutting could be even more incisive in case revenues remain below the
      expected targets. Moreover, these constraints and the significant resizing suffered by the
      Group (from the end of 2009 a reduction of almost 50% in branches and of about 40% in total
      assets) led to a reduction in the running costs and to a careful selection of the projects to
      invest in. To this end, the COG has activated various levers (e.g. on the IT supplier
      management, management control, and organisational measures) which currently allow to
      comply with the cost reduction plans, and even to anticipate them in terms of cash-out.
   13 The IT architecture is updated and could be open to future technological implementation to
      support the business activities, in a predictable horizon for a commercial bank. The bank
      identifies risks in the aging of the human resources and in the possible exits of valuable skills
      of the COG.
   14 The bank is considering two strategies: a stand-alone one based, above all, on the increase
      in operating efficiency and another focused on the sale and externalization of the COG (so
      called Venere project). Until the end of the OSI, however, neither option had been framed in
      an overarching consideration including the critical review of the bank's business model, in the
      light of the role and the foreseeable evolution of IT. Moreover, the Venere project still lacks an
      evaluation of the implicit strategic risks and a preventive cost-benefit analysis.
   15 A centralized process based on the Group Project Plan has been set up to define and
      oversee the project investments, in order to allow a stricter control of the top management
      and a strong alignment to the Restructuring Plan. However, these objectives are not
      adequately accomplished, considering the delay in strategic and relevant projects, the
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 8 of 71

      proliferation of numerous non-strategic investments, and a consistent backlog. The MPS
      Group has recently introduced organisational measures to overcome these issues (e.g. on
      the Demand function), but further improvements are required to reduce fragmentation of
      responsibilities and increase the effectiveness of the overall monitoring.
   16 Due to organizational and cultural factors, rather than a lack of investments, relevant
      weaknesses have been found in the IT security, particularly in management and monitoring
      of: a) privileged users; b) cyber incidents. With reference to the latter, it has been affected by
      relevant issues, especially regarding the traceability: the OSI team has found 13 cyber
      incidents which occurred in 2016 and 2017 and were not recorded in any incident
      management system, not escalated or formally reported, and not evaluated in their severity.
      Against this backdrop, the delays in implementation of IT Security projects on are relevant.
   17 The IT Continuity is overall adequately managed, although it requires the implementation of a
      suitable component mapping to improve the effectiveness of the Operational Continuity Plan
      (hereinafter PCO) and to ascertain in the test phases the recovery of the critical and systemic
      processes within the Recovery Time Objectives (hereinafter RTO) and the restart time limits .
   18 The Data Governance project is a relevant initiative to address the quality of the data with a
      structured approach. However, it is still at an early stage for coverage of the data perimeter,
      for completeness of the implementation (e.g. missing a definition of Key Quality Indicators),
      and limits in the coordination of the initiatives of the business functions. The development of
      the initiatives is envisaged in a three-year time horizon, which could entail delays and
      execution risks.
   19 The IT Risk Management has developed a methodology to control and asses the IT Risk, but
      the closing of some of the gaps on IT Security, that it had raised in 2016, was baseless. The
      IT Audit activities are characterised by an adequate depth of analysis and assessment, but
      they do not cover a sufficient perimeter.
   20 With regard to Widiba, it is characterised by a light structure, a strong integration between
      business and IT that reduces the time to market. The IT internal resources have up-to-date
      technological skills, in a dynamic and cohesive context. However, the strong orientation
      towards development determines the neglect of some risk profiles and limits in the traceability
      of the processes, for example in the incident management, in the monitoring of privileged
      user activities, in the Business Impact Analysis (hereinafter BIA). Moreover, these risks were
      not adequately mitigated by the local and group control functions.
   21 In conclusion, the OSI identified relevant shortcomings, mainly in the IT Security, due to
      inadequate organizational assets, incomplete implementations of the technical solutions,
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                              Page 9 of 71

         insufficient enforcement by the control functions, and shortcomings in the IT risk culture. On
         the other hand, the analysis of the OSI indicates that the current IT structure of the MPS
         Group can adequately support the requirements of the bank within the horizon of the
         Restructuring Plan, needing, however, a clear definition of the strategies and improvements in
         the project development.
2     Table of findings
      22 The below table provides a list of all findings.
                                                                                                         2
 #      FINDING                                                                              RANKING
 1      Uncertainties in the definitions of the IT strategic options of the MPS Group            F2
 2      Delays in strategic and relevant projects and inadequate involvement of the IT           F2
        function in the group IT planning
 3      The gaps of the COG IT security were unfoundedly closed by the IT Risk                   F3
        Management weakening the effectiveness of the remedial actions
 4      Weaknesses of the Group IT risk assessment                                               F2
 5      The IT Compliance function was not activated in Widiba                                   F2
 6      The scope of the MPS Group IT Audit Plan is limited and only partially                   F2
        adequate to mitigate the IT Risk
 7      The Monte Più Sicuro and Monte Protect Shield projects have not adequately               F3
        removed the weaknesses of the COG IT Security which emerged in the 2015
        analysis
 8     Weakness in the Identity management process of the COG                                    F2
 9     Weakness in privileged users management and monitoring process in the COG                 F3
 10    Defects of the security incident management of the COG                                    F4
 11    Defects of IT security in Widiba                                                          F3
 12     The BMPS’ PCOs are not complete; the continuity risk could not be mitigated              F2
2
  F1- Low impact, F2 – Moderate impact, F3 – High impact and F4 – Very high impact.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 10 of 71

       for single process due to the inadequate application mapping
 13   Weakness in Widiba’s BIA process and in the related risk assumption report               F3
 14    The COG Disaster Recovery test cannot demonstrate the compliance with the               F1
       restart time limits for systemic processes
 15   Delay in the implementation of MPS Group Data Governance project                         F2
    23 Table # 3 - Table of findings
3    Report Details
3.1    General requirements
3.1.1   Organisational framework
3.1.1.1 Governance
    24 The BMPS’ BoD is responsible for the direction and control of the IT, approving the overall
        Project Plan and the budget, the information system development strategies (the latest ones
        approved on 17.04.2017), the IT security policy, and the “greater importance transactions” -so
        called OMR- regarding IT (e.g. outsourcing of important operational functions). The BoD
        receives information about the COG operational trends (e.g. in the meeting held on
        17.04.2017), the yearly IT risk reporting, and is notified in case of serious problems for the
        company activity resulting from incidents and malfunctions. The BoD, renewed on
        18.12.2017, held an induction meeting on 15.01.2018 in which the managerial structure was
        presented and the main issues of the group were illustrated: those relating to the constraints
        of the Restructuring Plan and the relative repercussions on the group, the project plan,
        Widiba and the COG had a significant treatment.
    25 The Comitato Rischi (i.e. the Risk Committee internal to the BoD) expresses its opinions on
        outsourcing proposals and on IT risk issues. Furthermore, in the Risk Committee and in the
        Board of Statutory Auditors (hereinafter BoSA) the findings emerged from the Internal Audit
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                          Page 11 of 71

         (hereinafter IA) are actively discussed especially in case of high relevance gaps (for example
                                  3
         for the Ethical Hacking carried out on Widiba and on the COG).
    26 The BMPS Comitato Direttivo (Management Committee hereinafter MC), led by the Chief
         Executive Officer (hereinafter CEO) of BMPS and composed of the group's first managerial
         line, is in charge of the implementation of the strategic guidelines, having a direct supervision
         of the Project Plan and the related strategic IT projects.
    27 The head of the group IT function is the General Manager (hereinafter GM) of the COG (G.
         Damiani). On 01.12.2017 the CEO of Widiba (A. F. Cardamone) was also appointed as CEO
         of the COG. Moreover, on 17.04.2018 the Widiba and the COG hierarchical reporting lines,
         so far attributed to the Chief Commercial Officer and Chief Operating Officer respectively
         (hereinafter CCO and COO), were moved directly to the CEO of BMPS “in a logic of ever-
         increasing attention to technological innovation” and to “develop the digitalisation of the Bank,
         bringing it to the best market standards” (press release of 17.04.2018).
                                                                                                               4
    28 Several managerial committees are involved in the management of IT profiles in the BMPS
                            5.
         and in the COG Some of them are useful for the commitment to the IT efficiency and risk
         reduction (e.g. the Provided Services Committee and Risks), but the frequent need for
         coordination, the sharing of responsibility and the fragmentation of the processes have
         delayed the achievement of project objectives and weakened the direction and monitoring
         function (see par. 3.1.2 “Strategic Planning” and finding # 2).
    29 With regard to the control functions, weaknesses emerged in the effectiveness of the IT Risk
         Management (see par. 3.1.3 “Risk profile, risk appetite and risk strategy” and finding # 3 and
         4). The IT Compliance is extending its activities to the controlled entities, and in particular, to
         Widiba. (see par. 3.1.4 “IT Compliance” and finding # 5). The IT Audit does not cover relevant
         risk areas (see par. 3.1.5 “IT Audit” and finding # 6).
3
  Such Ethical hacking was commissioned by the IA to external providers to verify the strengthen of IT defences
and discovered unknown vulnerabilities.
4
  For example: the MC on strategic projects, the Comitato Operativo Progetti (Operational Project Committee,
hereinafter COP), the Demand Committees.
5
  Comitato di Direzione IT (IT Management Committee), Comitato Servizi Resi e Rischi (Provided Services
Committee and Risks), Comitato Fornitori (Supplier Committee), Comitato Progetti IT (IT Project Committee),
Comitato Architetture e Innovazione (Architecture and Innovation Committee).
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                  Page 12 of 71

3.1.1.2 Organisational structure and resources
    30 While the IT function is mainly concentrated in the COG and Widiba, in the parent company
        there are significant functions for the IT management:
        a) the control functions are all centralized, except for IT risk management units present in the
            COG and in Widiba that report functionally to BMPS Risk Management and cooperate in
            the analysis of IT Risk with the specialised unit (Rischi Informatici) in the Operating Risk
            Officer Area of BMPS;
        b) the Chief Program & Cost Officer Area (hereinafter CP&CO), in staff to the BMPS CEO
            oversees the definition and management of the group Project Plan, that encompasses the
            IT group investments, and it ensures consistency with the Restructuring plan approved by
            the European Commission. The Area Pianificazione (Planning Area), under the CFO, is
            instead responsible for the definition of the overall budget and, in this context, for the IT
            budget.
    31 Administrative units are present in the COG and in Widiba with functional reporting to the
        corresponding structures of the Parent Company and they have an indirect but not secondary
        role in the IT management (e.g. in the management and control of the IT spending; in the
        monitoring of the IT services; in the human resources management).
    32 The Logical Security and Operational Continuity function of BMPS (hereinafter LS-OC), set
        up in January 2017, is part of the “Area Sicurezza Integrata” (hereinafter ASI), directly
        reporting to the COO. The LS-OC reporting function inside the COG is the “IT Security and
        BCM” service (hereinafter ITS-BCM). See the following figures for the structure and resource
        of the two units.
    33 Figure # 2 – The IT Security and BC structure in MPS (source Organizational chart MPS
        dated March 2018)
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 13 of 71

    34 Figure # 3 – The COG’s IT Security structure (source Organizational chart COG dated
        March 2018)
    35 The COG had 862 headcount as of 31.12.2017, all seconded from MPS Group’s entities and
        constantly reduced over the years (e.g. from December 2015 the number fell by 9%), divided
                                                                                              6
        among five operational areas and in staff units in six different geographical premises . For the
        main organizational areas see the figure below
    36 Figure # 4 – COG simplified organizational chart (source Reorganization of the COG
        dated 20.10.2017)
    37 Due to the limited turnover, the average age is quite high (49.8 year). The COG has carried
        out an analysis of the compatibility of the trend of human resources envisaged in the time
        horizon of the Restructuring Plan, highlighting the existence of organizational levers that can
        be activated to maintain performance levels in line with previous years (e.g. job rotation,
        training, intragroup job posting, temporary assignments). However, criticalities emerged in the
        technological and security areas. A further analysis, based on the recognition carried out by
        the COG during the OSI on the staff needed by the IT area managers, has raised theoretical
        needs for about 40 resources: 26 in the application area, 9 in the technology and security
6
  The main are Siena and Firenze, followed by Mantova, Lecce, Padova and Milano.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                           Page 14 of 71

       area and 4 in the IT Governance; such deficits will be verified by more objective rightsizing
       analysis of the IT structure, following which the mentioned levers will be activated.
    38 A management continuity plan has been drawn up and the critical profiles, among the unit’s
       managers, have been identified. Anyway, the risk that critical resources leave the bank is not
       negligible (since 2016 almost 20 qualified skilled members of staff have left the COG),
       considering also the limitations on hiring, on labour costs, on incentives, and motivational
       factors. For example, the position of the IT Security manager is currently vacant.
    39 Table # 4 – Envisaged trend in COG employees (source COG organisation function)
             Evolution of the COG’s headcount       2017  2018    2019  2020    2021    Delta %
        Number of employees                           862   845     820    790    743        14%
    40 The organizational model of Widiba is simpler and more compact, characterized by a light
       structure, a strong integration between business functions and IT that allows a reduced time
       to market of the business IT-based initiatives. But this strong orientation towards development
       often determines an inadequate level of formalization (see findings # 4, 5, 11 and 13), which
       makes internal processes less traceable.
    41 In Widiba, the head of the IT & Digital Innovation is the Chief Information Officer, while the
       Chief Technology Officer is also responsible for the IT security (see next figure).
    42 Figure # 5 – The IT structure in Widiba (source Organizational chart Widiba dated
       21.03.2018)
    43 About 60 internal resources are currently involved in IT, with a relatively low age (36.5 on
       average) and have up to date technological skills, in a dynamic and cohesive context.
3.1.2  Strategic planning and budgeting
       Strategic guidelines and the Venere project
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 15 of 71

      44 In a context of rapid changes for the Bank, characterized by strong reduction in branches,
           employees and business volumes, the IT strategy has been aimed, above all, at increasing
           the efficiency, keeping a suitable level of service, according to the current needs, and taking
           into account the targets of the Restructuring Plan negotiated with the EU Authorities. In the
           MC of 23.02.2017 the CEO of BMPS requested an analysis about the future of the COG in
           the light of the strong downsizing of the group, evaluating the implications of a total or partial
           externalization. Therefore, on 23.03.2017, the CEO of BMPS informed the BoD of the
           strategic assessment in progress conducted by the top management through the so-called
           Venere project.
      45 In the same meeting, an overview of the COG, its key performance indicators (KPIs) and a
                                                                                                               7
           benchmark analysis were reported to the BoD, pointing out that the Total Cost of Ownership
           of the IT showed a strong and persistent decline, greater than that of competitors (see next
           figure), especially for the component of the running costs; all the unit cost indicators (e.g. IT
           costs per branches and employees) were in line with or better than those of he banking
           system. Moreover, future scenarios and constraints were presented as a premise to strategic
           rationales for a change of operating model, for example: the strong downsizing suffered and
           further expected for the MPS Group; the challenging objectives of the new business plan in
           terms of costs reduction; the level of efficiency already achieved by the COG; the ageing of
           the human resources in an innovative context.
      46 Figure # 6 – TCO of the COG compared to the market (source COG Planning and
           Control)
7
  The TCO is an aggregate of current expenses and depreciation of the IT sector collected by the CIPA (an
association between Banca d’Italia and the Italian banking association with the aim to promote inter-banking IT
initiatives) among the associated banks.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                  Page 16 of 71

      47 The bank’s expectations are that the new model should target significant cost savings, higher
              service quality, risks in line or lower than today and a different mix of internal staff. Three
              scenarios were identified for a potential externalization: 1) the IT infrastructure (e.g. hardware
              and network services); 2) the infrastructure and the only applications managing banking
              products and services (so-called "core banking") without customer contact channels; 3) the
              whole infrastructure and the full application inventory. Moreover, only the third scenario has
              been developed in the exploring activities, driven by the idea of sharing the COG’s ownership
              with an industrial partner backed by a financial sponsor. To this end, in the last months of
              2017, a competitive tendering was arranged opening a data room to ten counterparties.
      48 In February 2018, the bank received three non-binding offers (hereinafter NBOs)
              characterized by a high heterogeneity on the enterprise evaluation, and business model
                        8
              proposed . None of these ensure a cost reduction compared to the target of the Restructuring
              plan. Moreover, the COG is anticipating such targets in its budget projections– the budget is
              already close to the overall 2020 target -, especially in terms of cash out, as highlighted in the
              following table.
8
   The bidders are the following:
                               First group         Second group       Third group
                                                       Oracle
                               Engeenering
  Industrial partners                                TAS Group        Cedacri group
                                   IBM
                                                      NTT Data
                               Apax Partners       WDM Capinvest
  Financial partners                                                      FSI
                          Bergman Capital Partners   Highbridge
  Advisor                        Deloitte                                KPMG
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                     Page 17 of 71

    49 Table # 5 –Provisional cash out trends of the COG (source COG Planning and Control)
                                                Perimeter
                                                                               Restructuring Plan                Budget
                                             reclassified (a)
                    IT Cash out               2016      2017          2018         2019        2020    2021       2018
           Masterplan IT run costs              125.5    122.2           112.9       109.3       101.1    93.1     110.2
           Masterplan IT run other
                                                 29.7      28.9            26.3        24.9       24.4    22.5       27.9
           expenses
           Other costs                            3.3       3.3            11.4        11.1       10.9    10.6        6.2
           IT projects                          130.5    138.8           134.6       129.1       128.6  123.1      118.8
           Real estate projects                                                                                       4.1
                        Total                     289     293.2           285.2       274.4        265   249.3      267.2
           (a) the perimeter reclassified excludes from 2016 the acquiring services sold in 2017.
    50 On 17.04.2018, the management updated the BoD on the COG operations, strategic
        guidelines and possible industrial developments. The management highlighted the
        sustainability of the target of the restructuring plan (see table above) also in a standalone
        perspective. However, three strategic options were reported to the BoD: the first standalone
        driven by a business recovery of the MPS Group is not dependent on the IT Strategy. The
        other two effective strategies were a further downsizing of IT (currently pursued) and the
        implementation of the mentioned Venere project.
    51 Finding # 1 Uncertainties in the definitions of strategic options of the MPS Group
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the body with the strategic oversight function
shall be responsible on a general basis for the guidance and the control of the information system,
in order to allow an optimal use of the technological resources supporting the company’s strategies
(IT governance). In this context, it must approve the development strategies for the information
system in light of the evolution of the sector in question and in line with the existing or upcoming
structure of the sectors of operation, of the corporate processes and of the company’s organization.
 The decrease in the budget for the IT needs, the high average age of employees, and the need to
 keep the IT resources in line with those of the competitors, with a low level of operational risks
 induced the MPS Group to review the IT strategy.
 In this regard, the management is considering two options: a stand-alone strategy based, above
 all, on the increase in operating efficiency, and another one focused on converting the COG from
 captive into a market operator, providing IT services to different banks, as well as to MPS Group.
 Until the end of the OSI, however, at the Board’s level, neither option had been framed in an
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                            Page 18 of 71

 overarching consideration including the critical review of the Bank's business model, in the light of
 the role and the foreseeable evolution of IT. This is particularly important for the option consisting
 in the sale of the majority stakes of the COG, which would involve a radical organizational and
 operational change also with potential consequences on the Bank's broader strategies (e.g. due to
 a predictable long-term service supply agreement). However, this option has been pursued until
 non-binding offers from three associations of companies were obtained, in the absence of a
 preventive and fully-fledged assessment by the BoD.
 Furthermore, the two strategies, reported to the BoD in the meeting of the 17.04.2018 pursue
 conflicting objectives. In fact, the stand-alone hypothesis focuses on the optimization of strategic
 and relevant projects reducing the overall investments (this approach is summarized by the catch
 phrases "do less to do more", "focusing on business project", "valuation of investments of the
 past"). On the other hand, the so-called “Venere project” pursues incremental objectives as
 increasing investments aimed at a currently undefined service strategy (“increase the level of
 investments for innovation, the development of new services and IT know-how”).
 As a consequence, the “Venere project”, started in February 2017, still lacks an evaluation of the
 implicit strategic risks - the Risk Management function was only involved in June 2018 -, and of a
 preventive cost-benefit analysis As an example, the following facts that have not been adequately
 examined, yet:
 a) only three comparable operations were conducted in Italy, two of which on the sole IT
 infrastructure and, only one on the entire IT system, for a bank five times smaller than BMPS; on
 the other hand, only the full outsourcing scenarios have been evaluated in the first round of non-
 binding offers;
 b) the economic conditions shown to the potential partners are lean on the baseline of the
 Restructuring Plan while the anticipated achievement of the targets of that plan envisaged in the
 stand-alone strategy should be considered. Furthermore, the costs due to the retained
 organization needed to control the outsourcer and to manage the related risk (estimated at about
 150 FTE) should be included. Moreover, the employees of the COG are seconded by MPS group,
 and costs might be impacted by the uncertainness about their possible return within the bank;
 The flaws in the elaboration of a comprehensive IT strategy are due to the urgency of the actions
 implied by the Restructuring Plan that have hindered a deeper analysis of the links between IT and
 business in a forward-looking perspective.
The mentioned uncertainties in defining the IT Strategy could lead to a solution not consistent with
MPS Group’s future business needs and business strategies.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 19 of 71

     52 The COG was previously a consortium not constituted in a corporate form, but starting from
          30.06.2018 it has been transformed into a joint-stock consortium company, in order to benefit
                                                                                                        9
          from the adhesion to the VAT Group regime of MPS Group starting from 01.01.2019 .
     53 The group is conducting a simplification plan which currently provides for the integration of
          the subsidiaries MPSCS, and MPSL&F. In this condition, the only relevant group customers
          of the COG will be BMPS (more than 95% of the revenues).
     54 Table # 6 – Revenues from COG customers in 2017 (source COG Financial Statements
          as at 31.12.2017)
                                        Customer           Revenues in       %/Total
                                                           2017 (€/mln)
                                   BMPS                            320.3        90.5%
                                   MPSCS                            12.9          3.6%
                                   MPSL&F                            3.7          1.0%
                                   Widiba                            3.6          1.0%
                                   Other                             1.0          0.3%
                                   Not MPS Group                    12.7          3.6%
                                   TOTAL                           354.1         100%
     55 A hypothesis to integrate the COG in the bank was discussed among the management. For
          example, in the IT management committee of 25.01.2018 by the GM of the COG in the
          following terms: “For the change of tax regime, some institutions are reintegrating the IT part
          in the bank and our company could also evaluate this situation if the Venus operation did not
          materialize”. In fact, the change in the fiscal context (e.g. the VAT group regime of MPS
          Group starting from 01.01.2019) and the simplification of the Group have implications on the
          benefits of maintaining the Consortium as a separate entity, no longer linked to fiscal savings.
     56 As mentioned, in the meeting of 17.04.2018 the BoD was updated on the Consortium's
          operations, approving the new “Documento di indirizzo strategico dell’IT” (IT strategic
          guideline document), consistent with the group Restructuring Plan, and defined in a
          perspective of an "efficiency improvement strategy" (i.e. of further downsizing). The IT
          function intends to pursue the following strategic guidelines: a) increase the quality of the
          service, b) spend less and better, c) reduce operational risks, and d) increase the motivation
          of human resources.
9
  A new legislation relating to the VAT Group was introduced by Law n. 232/2016 going into effect from
01.01.2019. The option to create a Vat group should be exercised by the Parent Company and all subsidiaries by
September 2018 (the "all in, all out" principle is applied). These companies constitute a single indistinct subject
for VAT, with the consequence that all the transactions between these companies are irrelevant for this tax (in
practice, Vat is not applied to the intra-group transactions that occur within this perimeter).
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                     Page 20 of 71

     57 The document then describes which levers the COG has tactically activated and intends to
                                                                                                      10
          use to achieve these objectives, identifying, for each area (e.g. organisation , human
          resources, supplier management), the actions to reach them and allow the support of the
          objectives set. The actions are monitored by KPIs.
     58 However, the IT strategy reflects more general uncertainties related to the context in which
          the group operates and the achievement of the objectives of the Restructuring Plan in terms
          of revenues: if not reached, automatic cuts in costs (the maximum between € 100 mln and the
          missing revenue compared to the target) are provided that, reflected on IT, can entail risks in
                                   11
          the service provisions .
     Project planning and budgeting
     59 The overall budget decision, which includes also the IT component, is a centralized process
          managed by two different BMPS areas: a) the “Pianificazione” (Planning, under the CFO) in
          charge of running expenses, and b) the CP&CO, which oversees project investments of the
          Group. In September 2017, the latter area was moved to report directly to the CEO, with the
          aim to allow both a stricter control of the top management on this strategic area and a strong
          alignment of the Project Plan to the Restructuring Plan.
     60 The targets of the latter in terms of profit and loss indirectly set the maximum amount of
          investments allowed per year. In order to define the “Project Plan”, the Bank’s Directions
          submit their project initiatives, by providing, at least, a generic indication of the objectives to
          be achieved and a preliminary cost-benefit analysis; the level of definition of the project
          contents in this phase can be very variable. Subsequently, as a result of the negotiation with
          business units, the CP&CO selects initiatives deemed eligible for funding and allocates the
          available budget. This budget is then assigned to the requesting functions and included in the
          overall BMPS budget managed by the Planning and approved by the BoD (the latest in the
          meeting of 01.03.2018). A relevant quote of this budget is allocated to expenses and
          investments in IT projects (47% of the operative expenses -opex- and 61% of the capital
10
   For example, to gain efficiency the COG has adopted an approach that focuses the human resources on single
activities of run (i.e. ordinary management of the IT services) or change (i.e. IT project development). Recently,
an experiment to further strengthen this approach has been conducted, creating a specialised task force to
address specific efficiency issues.
11
   At the end of April 2018, the trend of total operating costs, € 759 mln, was well below the full year target (€
2,410 mln), but the net margin (€ 406 mln versus a target of € 1,354) was still not in line.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                    Page 21 of 71

          expenses -capex- in 2018). The budget for the projects of Widiba is managed in a single item
          of the Project Plan as a relevant initiative.
     61 The CP&CO supervises the Project Plan, in which the projects or the programs (i.e. set of
          more projects linked), are classified in four categories based on their relevance: a) Strategic
          (projects approved and monitored by the MC); b) Relevant (projects approved by the COP);
          c) Others: characterized by greater discretion (evaluated and approved by CP&CO); d)
          Plafond: small initiatives that cannot be defined or estimated a priori, whose responsibility is
          directly attributed to the business owners. The mandatory projects (i.e. due to regulatory
          commitments) are always strategic or relevant.
     62 Table # 7 – Project plan 2016-2018 (source CP&CO)
     63 Within the bank and the COG, a relevant number of Committees have been implemented to
          manage the definition and monitoring of projects, fragmenting the decision making and the
                                                  12
          monitoring centre (see finding # 2) .
12
   For example: a) the MC verifies the consistency of the Strategic projects with the overall Group’s strategy; and
oversees strategic projects; b) the COP manages the process of the Relevant projects, it evaluates and approves
their kick off, authorizing the release of the budget, and it monitors the results achieved and reports quarterly; c)
the IT Demand Committee is divided into two sessions: executive and operative. In the first the committee should
decide priorities on the IT requests solving conflict situations; in the operative session, the Demand Committee
approves the business requirement (hereinafter BR, see below) and defines the project internal priorities; d)
within the COG the Comitato Progetti IT monitors the progress of the project plan in the the IT development
phase, discussing the KPIs for the evaluation, and highlights the critical issues.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                      Page 22 of 71

   64 Once approved, projects with an IT component are implemented by the definition of several
        “business requirements” (hereinafter BR). Within a project, a BR is a component with full
        operational independence in the execution.
   65 In the BR, the business function defines needs, requirements and priorities, while the IT
        designs the technical solution. This process is managed by a team composed of members of
        the business, the demand manager (see below), organisation and the IT specialist. However,
        the need to coordinate multiple actors have led to delays in the definition of the BRs and a
        lack of effectiveness in defining priorities consistent with the Project Plan (see next finding).
   66 The second part of the BR lifecycle concerns the IT execution and release, and it is manly
        managed by the COG. The “Project Specialist” is responsible, for a single BR, for the
        implementation, the quality of the results, the deadlines and the budget assigned; while the
        “Project Manager” is in charge of the overview of BRs included in the same project.
    67 Until May 2018, the Demand Management in the BMPS Organization area was in charge of
         coordinating the business functions, the IT and Organization to deliver the BRs of the IT
         projects, with the aim to have an efficient resource allocation and improve time to market
         ensuring the quality of the services offered. However, these objectives were inadequately
         achieved. In the BoD meeting of 17.04.2018, the Demand function (about 20 resources) was
         transferred to the COG. The new solution would reduce the organisational complexity which
         slows the overall process since a coordination and an agreement among several subjects is
         required. In fact, the reform envisages a direct interface between IT and Business to shorten
         the “thinking time” and create only one point of monitoring of this process in the COG’s
         Management Control Department. In this context, the Demand Committees were dissolved
         (the BR is approved directly by the business manager), while the Organisation should be
         involved only in case the IT process requires revisions of rules and processes.
   68 Finding # 2 Delays in strategic and relevant projects and inadequate involvement of the
        IT function in the group IT planning
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the body charged with the management
function shall be responsible for ensuring the completeness, adequacy, functionality (in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency) and reliability of the information system. In particular, it must establish
the organizational structure of the IT function, ensuring that over time it corresponds with the
strategies and architectural models established by the body charged with the strategic oversight
function.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                               Page 23 of 71

The definition and the management of the Projects Plan have been affected by shortcomings,
reflected in an inefficient achievement of corporate strategies concerning the implementation of
strategic and relevant IT projects. In fact, the analysis carried out by the OSI team highlighted:
 a) Delays in the realization of such projects: 68% of them accumulated delays compared to the
    initial planning, and they were completed 6 months later than expected on average. The long-
    term projects (duration equal to 2/3 years) show the worst performance (e.g. EDM, Monte
    Project Shield; Sistema informativo filiali estere; Programma Banca Più) compared to the short-
    term ones, generally in line with the timing scheduled;
 b) The proliferation of numerous non-strategic investments, generally of small amount on average,
    that accounts for 28% of the IT external expenditure, and 47% of IT projects in 2018, with a
    consequent failure to focus the IT function on strategic initiatives. In 2017, the business
    requirements (hereinafter BR) produced by the “other projects” were 69% of all ended BR, and
    in the first part of 2018 they are still 44%. This is also due to the plafond agreed in the Project
    Plan for the business units to allow them some flexibility in the budget management, in a
    context of inadequate monitoring;
 c) a consistent backlog of BRs, in 2017, 577 BRs equal to 24% of the total, which is further
    growing in 2018, 671 BRs equal to 47% of the total as of end of May 2018;
 d) lack of previous analysis for the estimation of IT capability. Indeed, the estimation of IT
    expenses within a business case is carried out by the business units and the process did not
    envisage a formal validation by the IT function nor a “capability” evaluation with regard to the
    internal IT resources (e.g. all projects are planned in the first half of the year without a
    prioritization). It was only after the 2018 budget approval that the IT function conducted an in-
    depth analysis on “IT capability” to estimate the sustainability of the project plan compared with
    resources and the budget available within the COG. Such analysis highlighted some errors in
    cost estimations and the unfeasibility of the project plan within the scheduled time; in fact , to
    meet deadlines set by the plan on strategic and relevant projects, the COG has planned to
    reallocate internal resources and to postpone the “other projects” to the second half of the year
    or to 2019;
 e) The monitoring activities are currently focused on the BR lifecycle, however, also the time from
    the project kick off, from the complete definition of the relevant BR and from the BR approval
    and the IT execution should be monitored. Such monitoring suffers from inhomogeneous
    approaches of the Project Management (hereinafter PMO) to the management of the project
    and to the correct recording of the data of the project.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 24 of 71

 The described situations are also due to the fragmentation of the project implementation and
 monitoring processes, and to the multiple decision-making centres (e.g. Management Committee
 for strategic projects, Operational Project Committee for relevant projects, business owner for other
 projects, the Demand Committees executive session for the prioritisation of the execution of the
 project, other committees in the COG). In such a context, the Chief Program & Cost Officer
 (hereinafter CP&CO) who should have the central responsibility for this process, is substantially
 involved in the initial definition and in the final reporting (e.g. the said function does not have any
 access to the BR information) .
 The recent reorganization of the Demand function, moving them to the COG, should ensure a
 partial enforcement of the Project Plan execution and a reduction in the whole chain of
 responsibilities. However, a simplification and shortening of the decision making process and a
 concentration of the monitoring processes need further steps (e.g. require the approval of the
 single initiatives envisaged in the “other projects and plafond” after that their contents is defined;
 strengthening the PMO function and on statistic collections).
Such shortcomings in the management of this process could lead to an inefficient use of the limited
available resources.
     69 The Group will adopt a more rigorous process for the estimation of IT costs involved in the
         Project Plan, performing the analysis of sustainability in the coming year simultaneously with
         the project plan approval. Regarding the process of implementation of a project through the
         BR management, the bank estimates that, on average, the definition and the IT execution of
         a BR require 84 days and 135 days respectively, with an overall “time to market” of 219 days
         in 2017. The COG is committed to a relevant lowering of these time frames (in April 2018
         they were reduced to 187 days). Moreover, the bank is focusing on the reduction of the
         “other projects” in a strategy that would privilege the effort on the strategic and relevant ones.
     70 The budget for running expenses is entirely assigned to the IT function (the COG) that
         negotiates it for all the entities of the Group (including also Widiba). In this case the IT
         function discusses with the “Area Pianificazione” office, which reports to the CFO, in order to
         define the budget needed to manage the ordinary workflow. The running expenses in the last
         years have seen a strong reduction (-24% from 2015) because the COG has pursued an
         aggressive costs cutting strategy, (e.g. mostly focused on suppliers).
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                Page 25 of 71

                                                                                                             13
        71 Figure # 7 – Running expenses (source elaboration of COG Planning and Control)
        72 The 2018 budget for running IT operating expenses (€ 85.3 mln for the COG) has been cut by
            € 1.7 mln compared to the preliminary estimates of the COG. In order to achieve these
            further savings, the COG Management Control function is evaluating different assumptions,
            the main one being the renegotiation of the contract with IBM (the main supplier of hardware
            and services).
3.1.3      Risk profile, risk appetite and risk strategy
        73 The IT risk appetite and tolerance thresholds are established annually in the RAF: if the
            potential risk exceeds the IT risk appetite, suitable mitigation measures must be promptly
            identified to contain it within the limits defined in a maximum time horizon of 12 months. The
            Group RAS for 2017 established that IT risk should not exceed the "Medium" level. In the
            cascading down of the RAS 2017, three Key Risk Indicators were defined relating to the
                                                                                                             14
            major incidents on IT resources, serious security incidents (notified to supervisors)               and
            fraud on Internet Banking customers. As emerged in the following figure, the tolerance
            threshold for the serious security incidents was not met in 2017.
13
   It includes the overall COG running costs, including also non-IT components.
14
   The serious security incidents are those envisaged in the Banca d’Italia, Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo
IV, Capitolo 4, sezione 1, linked to: high economic losses or prolonged disservices, b) significant disruptions on
customers and other subjects, and c) the risk of undermining the bank's ability to comply with the conditions and
obligations of the law or envisaged by the supervisory regulations. The concept of security in the regulation is
wider than logical or cyber security, and includes also the continuity and the compliance of the system. In
general, in the present OSI report the security concept is instead referred to logical and cyber security.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                       Page 26 of 71

   74 Figure # 8 IT risk Risk Appetite Assesment (source IT Risk Report 2017)
   75 Moreover, in the RAF the evaluation of the IT risk is integrated by a judgmental assessment
       driven by the adopted methodological framework based on two kinds of analysis:
      a. A “Low Level” analysis carried out on a perimeter of IT assets, selected yearly on the basis
          of confidentiality, integrity, and availability criteria (hereinafter CIA). In 2016, about 650 IT
          assets were scored, and a perimeter of 370 (of which 237 had been analysed at the end of
          2017) were chosen for the assessment with the low level methodology according to a
          three-year plan (2016-2018);
      b. A “Top Level” analysis, with the aim of evaluating the comprehensive risk situation of the
          IT function and this applies to the single IT sector (Technological architecture Service,
          Application architecture Service, etc.) based on Key Risk Indicators (KRIs). The COG has
          implemented a specific set of KRIs for the IT Security sector that are different from those
          applicable to the other 38 sectors.
   76 When the analysis rates “high” the risk of an IT asset or of a sector, the IT Risk Management
       identifies the areas for improvement and the actions (gaps) that should lower the risk to the
       level accepted by the RAF within a scheduled time, recording and tracking them through the
       RIGAM procedure. The adoption of a recommendation by the control functions is a powerful
       governance tool for the MPS Group, since the closing of the gaps in the scheduled time
       frame is strictly monitored by the control Bodies (i.e. Risk Committee and BoSA).
   77 The IT Risk management approach is methodologically correct, however deficiencies
       emerged in the application of the IT controls and in the effectiveness of the IT Risk function
       in COG and in Widiba.
   78 Finding # 3 The gaps of the COG IT security were unfoundedly closed by the IT Risk
       Management weakening the effectiveness of the remedial actions
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione III, transposing artt.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                Page 27 of 71

74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the analysis of IT risk is an instrument for
guaranteeing the effectiveness and efficiency of the measures adopted to protect IT resources by
making it possible to graduate the mitigation measures in the various environments according to
the bank’s risk profile. The analysis must establish the residual risk to be submitted for formal
acceptance by the system owner. If the residual risk exceeds the bank’s IT risk appetite approved
by the body charged with the strategic oversight function, the analysis must propose the adoption
of alternative or additional risk treatment measures, drawn up in cooperation with the risk control
function and submitted for approval to the body charged with the management function.
The MPS Group Risk Appetite Framework envisages that a potential IT risk cannot exceed the
medium level. If this level is exceeded, mitigation measures must be promptly identified.
In 2015, the IT Risk Management function of the Parent Company and its COG functional reporting,
on the basis of the analyses conducted, rated high the level of risk in the IT Security Service of the
Consortium, due to several IT security weaknesses, as reported to the BoD in the meeting of
25.02.2016 in the “Relazione sul Rischio Informatico - Anno 2015” (Report on IT Risk – Year 2015).
As a consequence, twenty actions were planned to overcome the related security gaps that should
have been completed by the end of 2016 to reduce the risk. Such actions were included in the
Monte Più Sicuro project (hereinafter M+SP).
In January 2017, the IT Risk Management certified the closure of these gaps based on the
statement given by the units in charge of the remedial actions about their completion.
Consequently, the risk of the sector was assessed as lower compared to the valuation of the
previous year and was reduced to medium in 2017.
However, the OSI team ascertained that the closing of the following gaps was not effective, since
the alleged solutions were based only on the drafting of a document about a new security process
or on a software selection instead of an effective implementation of a process or an effective
adoption of a security procedure:
 a.    Privileged user management;
 b.    Formalization and enforcement of the security incident management process;
 c.    Periodic reporting on security incidents and events;
 d.    Acquisition and implementation of vulnerability assessment products;
 e.    Review of the secure software development lifecycle.
In fact, the abovementioned security problems related to the twenty actions identified, are not
substantially solved.
In addition, the gap on the organizational security sector was declared closed in January 2017 even
if the organizational analysis of the security sector was completed only in April 2017.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                           Page 28 of 71

The OSI conclusion is also supported by the fact that such activities are still planned in the M+SP,
which has now become one of the four workstreams of the larger Monte Protect Shield project
(hereinafter MPSP), with the overall conclusion scheduled for the beginning of 2019.
The unfounded closure of findings, without the problems being effectively overcome, has reduced
the management commitment to such actions.
    79 The Report on IT Risk year 2017 of the COG, highlights areas for improvement of the risk
         analysis linked to the weaknesses of some IT processes (e.g. incident and problem
         management, architectural assessment); the OSI verified the consistency and correctness of
         the IT Risk Management evaluations; among them, the IT Risk Management reports the lack
         of a security incident detection system that is one of the gaps considered already closed in
         the mentioned certification of January 2017 (see point b. of the above finding).
    80 Finding # 4 Weaknesses of the Group IT risk assessment
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that a risk control based on continuous information
flows on the evolution of IT risk and a monitoring of the effectiveness of the measures for the
protection of IT resources should be implemented by the second-level control functions. The
management of the overall IT risk must be linked with the analysis of the individual IT resources.
The assessments made must be documented and revised at least once a year in the light of the
results of the monitoring process.
The Risk Management of MPS Group has defined a methodological approach for the evaluation of
the IT risk that provides for the parallel operation of two types of analysis, “Top Level" and "Low
Level". The OSI analysis highlighted: a) the need to strengthen the level of assessment and to
improve the methodological approach of the application of the model in Widiba; b) in the COG the
level of analysis already achieved, is, however, affected by the defects reported below.
With regards to Widiba, the 2017 Top Level analysis is based on a set of six indicators not
sufficient to objectively measure the IT risk; in detail:
 a. unlike the COG, there is no specific analysis of the security risks compared to general IT risks;
 b. four indicators substantially analyzed only two phenomena; in fact, the KRIs, FRD (Sum of
    losses suffered by online customers for computer fraud) and CFRD (Percentage of online
    customers who have suffered losses, out of total online customers) monitor both the level of
    fraud, while GAP (weighted sum of the active gaps issued by the Control Functions on the
    Widiba IT Function) and PT (sum of the vulnerabilities detected by the internal vulnerability
    assessment and penetration test) must be aggregated because the audit did not perform any
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 29 of 71

    activities in 2017, relying on the results emerged in the internal penetration test done by the
    same company used in the ethical hacking performed in 2016;
 c. the DQM (the number of manual interventions on data in production) scale was based on the
    observation of only one year value (with no other benchmark) that was set to medium risk;
 d. the reliability of the INCIDENT indicator (weighted sum of IT incidents) suffers from a not fully
    traceable process of the incident management (see finding #11);
 e. indicators about both security (e.g. security offenses or incidents) and the quality of the
    development process (e.g. indicator about efficiency and stability of the software internally
    developed) are substantially missing.
 With regard to the analysis carried out on each single IT asset (Low Level), different components
 (e.g. Software Infrastructure, Database, Infrastructural product) characterized by different
 technicalities, complexity and criticality were aggregated in only one asset without an adequate
 granularity. Moreover, the potential risks emerged from the scenario analysis were considered
 mitigated by controls declared by the IT function without an effective challenging of these controls
 by the internal IT Risk Management.
The Top Level analyses of the COG are more structured and the Low Level analyses are
conducted with a more challenging approach with the IT asset owners. However, the model is not
entirely robust with regards to the following:
 • in the Top Level analysis of the IT security function, KRIs about the security offenses and
    incidents are missing;
 • the adoption of the BITSIGHT indicator (a market benchmark about IT security) per se is not
    representative of the risk level without taking into account its components (e.g. Open ports in
    which the bank is valued “A” -the best grade- or Application security in which the grade is “D”,
    the fourth of six levels); moreover, the indicator used for the COG is contaminated by the
    Widiba's IP addresses;
The OSI highlighted the need to strengthen Widiba’s IT Risk Management, with a greater oversight
by the group function in charge, and to increase the critical review of the indicators by the IT Risk
Management of the COG.
The above reported weaknesses could hinder an objective IT risk evaluation. The formal
application of the model in Widiba led the IT Risk Management to miss the opportunity to gain a
deeper knowledge of the grade of controls of the innovative platform.
    81 Bitsight is an entity specialised in scoring the It corporate security. By leveraging the security
         information available on the global network, Bitsight applies an algorithm to generate a
         security classification (e.g. the mentioned BITSIGHT indicator).
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                              Page 30 of 71

     82 Widiba has planned an integration of the methodology for the IT Risk that envisages: a) the
          integration of the KRIs for the Top Level analysis (e.g. FIX1 weighted number of corrective
          fix), or used to improve the set of information (e.g. CYBR for the number of external cyber-
          attacks); b) a more analytical approach to the asset of the Low Level analysis. Such
          implementations are scheduled by the end of 2018.
3.1.4    IT Compliance
    83 The Compliance organisation, including the IT Compliance, was reviewed starting from 2016,
         following the outcomes of the OSI-2015-ITMPS-32-33 on Internal Governance and Risk
         Management. The IT Compliance activities covered the parent company, and, indirectly the
         COG, while the coverage of the group entities is still incomplete.
    84 Finding # 5 The IT Compliance function was not activated in Widiba
 Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
 74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the internal control system responsibilities
 must be clearly assigned for the performance of second-level controls regarding the observance of
 the internal rules and external provisions concerning IT (IT compliance), guaranteeing, inter alia,
 the consistency of organizational arrangements with external provisions, for the parts concerning
 the information system.
 The IT Compliance function in Widiba has not been activated since its foundation at the end of
 2014, nevertheless the organization and the processes of the subsidiary are based on a central
 role of the IT structure. It was only during the OSI, in June 2018, that the BMPS IT Compliance
 started the activity to verify the compliance of Widiba with the provisions of Banca d’Italia Circolare
 no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4 on Information System.
 As a consequence, the OSI recorded the non-compliance with Banca d’Italia provisions for IT
 management of the policy implemented by Widiba on IT security (see finding # 11) and on IT
 continuity (see finding # 13).
     85 In the 2018 Compliance plan the coverage of the cyber security topics is envisaged.
3.1.5    IT Audit
     86 The IT Audit activities are characterised by an adequate depth of analysis and assessment,
          and conducted also by means of vulnerability assessments and penetration tests conducted
          in the COG and in Widiba (so called ethical hacking). However, a limited number of checks
          was carried out, only 14 interventions in 2017, without covering a sufficient perimeter.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 31 of 71

     87 Finding # 6 The scope of IT Audit Plan is limited and only partially adequate to mitigate
          the IT Risk
 Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
 74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the planning of inspections by the IT Audit
 must ensure adequate cover over time of the various applications, infrastructures and management
 processes, including any components that are outsourced. Regardless of the form chosen for
 carrying out the reviews, the internal audit function must be able to provide assessments of the
 main identifiable technological risks and of the bank’s overall management of IT risk.
 The number of IT audits and the topics covered in the period analyzed by the OSI (12 in 2016, 15
 in 2017, 12 scheduled in the 2018) are not sufficient, considering that:
  a) since its foundation, at the end of 2014, and until the end of the inspections the IT of Widiba
     was audited only five times. In 2017, due to the postponement of the audit on the anti-fraud
     platform, no IT audit was performed on the subsidiary which, given its strong focus on
     innovation, is characterized by a significant potential exposure to technological risks. For
     example, the IT Audit has not covered change management, incident management or IT
     continuity activities.
  b) Relevant areas in the COG have not been covered by IT audits in the last three years and in
     the 2018 audit plan, e.g. IT outsourcing management, nevertheless, important IT functions were
     outsourced (e.g. mail services, first level SOC); the identity management was verified in 2014,
     while the incident management (in particular about cyber incidents) was not audited.
 The said flaws may result in the failure to detect significant risks in the areas not covered by the IT
 audit.
3.2    System architecture
     88 The IT system architecture is commensurate to the banks’ (both Widiba and BMPS) business
          needs and could be open to future technological updating to provide support to new
          prospective business activities, in a predictable scenario of bank systems evolution (e.g.
          increasing digitalization of banking processes, mixed channel model).
     89 For the COG the application and network models are documented and the configuration
          management database (hereinafter CMDB) is sufficiently updated. The CMDB contains the
          list of the applications and technological assets present in the data centres and, among other
          information, for each application the following data are recorded: the map of the dependency
          from the other applications, the name of the server where the application is running and the
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 32 of 71

       list of the application software components. The technical documentation is complete and
       covers the application architecture, the network of data centres and the database storage
       area; other technical documents describe the mainframe and middleware systems’
       configuration (e.g. CICS, application servers).
   90 The model adopted is based on the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA paradigm) with
       multiple presentation layers (user interfaces) based on a three-layer schema, which permits
       the interoperability of heterogeneous platforms (see next figure). The most important user
       interface present in the front-end layer is the internet banking (also named digital banking)
       that is implemented using J2EE technology. Widiba and BMPS are using different digital
       banking platforms, also if they started from the same ones, the front end of Widiba, about
       three years ago. In fact, the IT function of Widiba and the COG have evolved and maintained
       their front-end autonomously, without coordination, at least for security aspects (see finding #
       7). The COG offers to Widiba a housing service to locate the front-end, but the system and
       the network are separated and managed independently.
   91 Figure # 9 – BMPS IT Architectural scheme (source presentation “Application
       Architecture – As is situation”)
   92 The back-end logic is almost totally developed using mainframe technology (PL/I and Cobol
       language), and has been integrally coded by the COG; furthermore, most of the common
       components used in mainframe environment (e.g. Customer Information Control System –
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                           Page 33 of 71

         CICS) have been customized to better fit the business requirements. A customized
         framework library (named COGITO) has been developed and incremented during the years
         to optimize and standardize the coding of mainframe services.
     93 The services implemented in the mainframe environment are published using .NET and J2EE
         technologies which create the SOA service layer that is called by the front-end applications
         to implement a synchronous communication. SSL certificates are used to trust the
         communication between the front-end and back-end. A set of message queues servers
         provides a channel for the asynchronous communication between front-end and back-end (it
         is used, for example, when the front-end asks the back-end to execute a batch procedure).
     94 The data centres are located in Firenze (the primary) and Siena, and with regard to the high
         availability, the systems that serve the front-end are configured as active/active while the
         back-end is configured in active/passive mode. In 2016, the geographic configuration of the
         two sites was evaluated as fully satisfactory for the MPS Group. In fact, the solution adopted
         ranked third, in terms of security, compared to the configurations of the main Italian banks,
         being able to boast two sites at a distance of 60 km, with synchronous replication and an
                                                                               15
         extremely remote probability that they might be both compromised .
     95 The Storage Area Network (hereinafter SAN) ensures that the transactions are
         simultaneously replicated with a delay of 1.2 ms in the two data centres, both for the
         database of the back-end and front-end layers.
15
   The impact analysis update, commissioned at the University of Siena in July 2016, showed a medium and
medium-low seismic hazard (respectively for Firenze and Siena), an absent geomorphological hazard and a
medium hydraulic hazard for Firenze.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 34 of 71

   96 Figure # 10 – BMPS IT Network scheme (source presentation “Network architecture of
       the Data Centres”)
   97 The Palo Alto device (see above figure) provides the first level of firewalling, filtering and
       inspecting the traffic in outbound and inbound from the Internet to the data centre’s web
       servers. It ensures the monitoring of malicious activities coming from the Internet channel.
       The F5 web application firewall balances the traffic between the web servers and the
       application servers and the databases present in the front-end layer. At the same time, it
       performs specific controls on the network traffic to improve the security of communication.
       The communication in outbound and inbound the back-end area is controlled by the
       Fortigate Firewall. The said network schema is also adopted by Widiba to manage the
       network traffic in its front-end layer. The only difference is in the manufacturer of the firewall
       devices (Huawei).
   98 The connection between the two data centres (Firenze and Siena) is ensured by two dark
       fiber provided by two carriers, and the Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (hereinafter
       DWDM) technologies supplies a bandwith up to 10Gb/s. To improve the interoperability of
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 35 of 71

           the two data centres, a set of geograpichal area networks have been set as an extension of
           some Virtual Local Area Netwoks (hereinafter VLAN) of the two data centres.
       99 Widiba designed the online banking platform (hereinafter BOL) in 2013 using an open-source
           model and adopting the Agile software development approach. This strategy has allowed the
           bank to reduce the time to market and the risk of vendor lock-in. The developers team
           collaborates with the open source community and has a good know-how for managing the
           platform’s maintenance and evolution.
3.3     IT security management
3.3.1     The Monte Più Sicuro and Monte Protect Shield projects
       100 In May 2015, the BMPS, through the self-assessment carried out in the ECB questionnaire
           on cyber-risk exposure, evaluated a high exposure to the IT Security Risk, as reported in the
           “Relazione sul Rischio Informatico - Anno 2015” (IT risk report – year 2015) of February
           2016. As a result, a list of tasks and objectives was prepared to mitigate the highlighted risks.
           Therefore, a project was launched in the COG (the M+SP) with three main goals: i) to ensure
           compliance with regulatory standards; ii) to reduce the risk to an acceptable level, taking into
           account economic constraints iii) to foster a cultural transformation in the cyber security. The
           M+SP was presented for approval to the COP on 30.03.2016.
       101 In April 2016, the COG commissioned a new IT Security assessment to Deloitte, to ascertain
           if the already planned mitigation activities would have been sufficient to lower the risk level.
           The Deloitte’s analysis confirmed that the IT Security risk was high, identifying further gaps in
           IT security. The already planned activities, if completed on schedule - the end of 2016 -
           would have allowed to achieve a medium-high risk posture. To get an overall medium
           posture, the COG promptly integrated new mitigation activities in the said M+SP.
       102 The Deloitte gap analysis assessed that important security weaknesses should have been
           quickly resolved:
                                      16
            a. Logical attacks: APT       and/or software vulnerability exploits; vulnerabilities on personal
                devices allowing an unauthorized access to information and other weak points;
16
   Advanced Persistent Threats – a special kind of hidden logging finalized to acquire a user behaviour including
all its application access rights to suddenly take advantage simulating and exploiting this knowledge by
movements of money to criminal associations
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                   Page 36 of 71

          b. Misuse: access rights escalation; high probabilities of errors by untrained personnel;
              faults due to wrong application design (including secure code development lifecycle,
              tests and change management processes); faults in hardware assets.
     103 At the beginning of 2017, Accenture was engaged by the ASI to carry out an IT Security
         Maturity Assessment on the whole BMPS Group. At the end of April 2017, Accenture
                                                                                                   17
         reported on the expected IT maturity by the end of the year 2017 and at the end of 2018 ,
         considering market benchmarks and regulatory requirements. Its report highlighted
         weaknesses mainly in the security strategy role, in the learning and awareness process, in
         the security compliance, in the research & development and in the supplier security
         compliance.
     104 During the COP meeting of 05.07.2017, the M+SP status was updated and the need to
         postpone some planned M+SP activities was reported because of a reduction in the
         resources due to the Restructuring Plan. Moreover, it was reported that, according to the
         Accenture’s benchmark, by the end of 2017, the BMPS would have achieved an adequate
         maturity in the sectors that have been identified and rated as weak. In October 2017, the
         M+SP has been incorporated in the wider MPSP project to close the gaps reported by the
         Accenture’s assessment on Widiba, on ASI, on the COG, and on business continuity
         management (hereinafter BCM).
     105 The MPSP (see next figure) consists of four sub-projects: i) Security Governance to enforce
         the role of ASI in steering the MPS Group IT security; ii) M+SP; iii) Widiba Cyber Security
         focused on the IT security implementation in Widiba; iv) BCM Revamping aimed at updating
         the business continuity management process.
17
   See “Maturity Assessment Sicurezza Logica (Accenture2017).pdf”
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                        Page 37 of 71

   106 Figure # 11 – Monte protect shield project structure (source Project presentation)
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                    Page 38 of 71

    107 The overall budget (capex and opex) used in the M+SP amounts to € 2 mln and to € 3.7 mln
          in 2016 and 2017 respectively. Moreover, in the last years the project has not absorbed the
          whole budget assigned. The 2018 budget for the M+SP amounts to € 4 mln, while the overall
          budget of the MPSP is € 5.3 mln.
    108 Finding # 7 The Monte Più Sicuro and Monte Protect Shield projects have not
          adequately removed the weaknesses of the COG IT Security emerged in the 2015
          analysis
Banca d'Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione II, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the organizational structure of the ICT function
is based on functional, efficiency and security criteria, clearly defining tasks and responsibilities and
providing for the responsibilities and arrangements for the planning and control of the portfolio of
ICT projects (including the governance of changes in the architecture and of technological
innovation) and for the activities involved in the operation of the information system.
The M+SP, incorporated in the wider MPSP, has not achieved all expected benefits in the security
area. The original goals to address the relevant weaknesses emerged in 2015 and at the beginning
of 2016 (highlighted by the self-assessment performed in the ECB Questionnaire and by Deloitte)
were inadequately pursued, showing relevant delays. In fact, the OSI team observed that:
 • The activity tracking and the conclusion of the scheduled tasks of the M+SP were not correctly
    recorded, in a context of almost simultaneous change in M+SP management, both in the
    Security areas of BMPS and the COG.
 • The goals mentioned in the finding # 3 (see bullet points from a. to e.) have been split in two or
    more sub-activities (e.g. software selection, installation, rollout), only carrying out the initial
    steps; for example: CyberArk was only installed but it is not used for the individual privileged
    user management yet; Fortify, the tool for the code development security checks, was tested in
    January 2017 with its first round and no longer used;
 • The delays in an accountable incident management process or an effective privileged user
    management (see finding # 9), have not been mitigated by any tactical solutions;
 • The MPSP, started towards the end of 2017, currently shows a renewed commitment; however,
    it still fails in the coordination of important security aspects between the COG and Widiba. For
    example, the COG is unaware of the Linux security weaknesses discovered by Widiba on the
    similar digital banking platform used by both.
In May 2017, the budget assigned to the project was cut compared to the expected needs of about
20%, limiting the possibility of reaching the expected goals. Moreover, the IT Security spending of
MPS Group versus the total IT spending was only 2% in 2016, 4.1% in 2017 and is envisaged to be
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 39 of 71

 5.1% in 2018, compared to the system average of 6%.
 The M+SP poor management and the partial results achieved have not adequately removed the
 weaknesses detected, consequently, the MPS Group is still exposed to the related threats,
 considering also the external IT security changing scenario.
     109 With regards to Fortify implementation, during the OSI the platform was adopted as a
         “security gate” in the software development lifecycle (i.e. a control is carried out before going
         into production). However, only one round has been carried out so far.
     110 At the end of 2017, the BMPS took out a cyber insurance to cover up to € 20 mln damages
         (exceeding a minimum of € 0.5 mln per each event) to mitigate the main risks.
     111 Figure # 12 – Cyber-risk insurance (source Memo for the BoD of 14.11.2017 about the
         subscription of a Cyber-risk insurance)
3.3.2   Policies
     112 The IT Security related policies are mainly based on two layers: a) the ASI defines the main
         guidelines for the topics considering also legal and regulatory bounds; b) the COG, Widiba
         and the other subsidiaries implement the guidelines in specific and operational aspects in
         their context. In this implementation, they could extend the minimum requirements expected
         by the guidelines. Among the mandatory requirements for Widiba and the COG, the following
         are envisaged: a) the security incident response must be available 24 hours for 7 days
         (hereinafter 24x7), and any identified threats require a risk evaluation of the current systems
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                              Page 40 of 71

           and a vulnerability assessment b) the application developing and updating phases must use
           secure software development methodology.
      113 The COG has implemented several policies to regulate security aspects (e.g. Incident
           Management policy, Cybersecurity Incident Management policy and Access Control
           Management). The severity evaluation in the Incident Management policy is based on a
           precise definition of Major Incident, in terms of assessed impacts according to economical,
           geographical, availability and regulatory dimensions. In the same policy, a priority evaluation
           is also considered based on the urgency and on the impact associated to the event. The
           Cyber Security Incident Management process provides for the conditions to classify a Major
           Incident using the same criteria specified in the Incident Management policy mentioned
           above.
      114 In general, the BMPS policies are adequate considering all the main aspects of the security
           topics, while the transposal by COG and Widiba should be improved (see finding # 8, 9, 10
           and 11).
3.3.3     Procedures
          The Identity Management process
      115 The Identity Management process starts with the assignment of a new user to an
           organization role by means of PaschiPeople (i.e. a customized version of People by
           Peoplesoft). An automatic workflow registers the user in the BMPS Windows domain. The
           user is then enabled to access the systems by means of his/her credentials: almost all
           applications (529 over 582) are enabled to be compliant with the Single Sign On (hereinafter
                                 18
           SSO) infrastructure .
      116 By policy, the user appointment is formalized by a document that specifies the credentials
           (user id and the first one-time password) handed over to the concerned person who signs it.
      117 Within the COG the target platform to manage the authorisation profiles is the Oracle Identity
           Management (hereinafter OIM), but there are still two residual ways in place to manage
           them:
18
    The SSO infrastructure is one of the core infrastructure components that allows to pass identity between
different technologies like Microsoft Active Directory, Linux and host based systems.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                               Page 41 of 71

          a) The Nuovo Controllo Accessi (hereinafter NCA) was developed years ago to manage,
              together with other components (e.g. the unified log system, the session manager), the
              user profile access rights of the internal developed applications. Most of the authorization
              management of NCA was migrated to the OIM, but it is still used for the host
              applications. An automatic reconciliation process is carried out between OIM and NCA.
          b) the applications not integrated with OIM.
    118 Finding # 8 Weakness in the Identity management process of the COG
Banca d'Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione IV, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the security of information and IT resources
must be guaranteed by physical and logical security safeguards and procedures, whose strictness
must be graduated according to the outcomes of the risk evaluation. These measures must be
distributed over several layers and, among the other, must comprise: a) authentication procedures
for accesses to ICT applications and systems; b) the procedures for the performance of critical
operations, ensuring compliance with the principles of least privilege and segregation of duties (e.g.
specific procedures of authorization and authentication, four-eyes controls and daily ex-post
checks); c) the continuous management of the staff assigned to the processing of data and the
performance of critical operations (e.g. by periodically verifying the lists of authorized staff).
Moreover, International standard (ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.2 “Segregation of duties”) states that
conflicting duties and areas of responsibility should be segregated to reduce opportunities for
unauthorized or unintentional modification or misuse of the organization’s assets.
The Identity Management process, formally appointed in the IT Security function in the COG, is
fragmented and only partially under the control of that function; in fact, for the applications not
integrated with OIM (187 out of 582) the user management (i.e. creation and profiling, including the
special user management) is informally delegated to each application responsible and is not
monitored by the ITS-BCM. Moreover, a review process is not in place to verify both the user
grants for applications not directly connected to the OIM and the user grants assigned inside the
OIM. Among the consequences, the segregation of duties principle could be breached: the OSI
team observed such violation for the antifraud engine application (RAKE), not under the OIM
control, whose fraud detection configuration rules and the monitoring of suspicions transactions are
carried out by the same person.
These weaknesses expose BMPS to the risk of violation of data confidentiality, integrity and
availability.
    119 In February 2018, a critical incident affected the ATMs networks. This incident was caused
         by a wrong configuration sent by a remote web console installed on the COG server by a
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                Page 42 of 71

         supplier (Fabbrica Digitale, third party of the outsourcer Bassilichi), without the COG being
         aware of it.
    120 Finding # 9 Weakness in privileged user management and monitoring process in the
         COG
Banca d'Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione IV, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the security of information and IT resources
must be guaranteed by physical and logical security safeguards and procedures, whose strictness
must be graduated according to the outcomes of the risk evaluation. These measures must be
distributed over several layers and, among the other, must comprise: a) authentication procedures
for accesses to ICT applications and systems; b) the procedures for the performance of critical
operations, ensuring compliance with the principles of least privilege and segregation of duties (e.g.
specific procedures of authorization and authentication, four-eyes controls and daily ex-post
checks); c) the actions of system administrators and other privileged users must be strictly
controlled; d) the continuous management of the staff assigned to the processing of data and the
performance of critical operations (e.g. by periodically verifying the lists of authorized staff).
Moreover, International standard (ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.2 “Segregation of duties”) states that
conflicting duties and areas of responsibility should be segregated to reduce opportunities for
unauthorized or unintentional modification or misuse of the organization’s assets.
The activities of the privileged users, including the application administrators, are not monitored in
the COG. In addition, the external resources involved in the system monitoring are also
administrators of the same systems, violating the segregation of duties principle.
The OSI team asked the COG for the system administrators lists (e.g. domain, Linux, Windows
servers, database, middleware), which were extracted directly from the systems. A relevant number
of administrator user-ids were found: 9 for enterprise domains, more than 200 for local Windows
servers, more than 200 for Linux server, over 60 for mainframe and more than 25 for departmental
database servers (corresponding overall to about 300 users of which about 100 external). In such a
context, a periodic review process of active administrators, both for systems and applications, is not
currently envisaged in the COG policy.
However, the bank is trying to control the high number of administrators, also without a structured
approach (e.g. based on checks of the COG management). During the OSI (April 2018), the COG
terminated a one-off review started in January of the system administrators that revoked further
about 700 users (moving from about 1,000 to the about 300 mentioned above).
Other privileged users (i.e. applications, databases) are still excluded from these initiatives.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                Page 43 of 71

Moreover, matching the administrator user appointments and the administered resources is not
possible because the resources that would have been managed at the appointment time, were not
specified. Therefore, a misuse of the administrator role cannot be verified (e.g. a mutual
assignment of roles between two different server administrators not previously authorised).
These weaknesses have caused the critical incident of February 2018 where an application,
running as local administrator of the ATMs, based on a Windows system, deleted most boot files
affecting more than 50% of the BMPS ATMs (of which about 15% were completely out of order).
Moreover, the supplier involved could remotely access this console, without any authentication,
corrupting the ATMs configuration. Discovering the user who accessed such console was
impossible also for the internal audit investigation.
These weaknesses entail the risk that these privileged access rights might lead to lack of data
confidentiality, integrity and availability, without being promptly detected with consequent
reputational and operational risks.
    121 The shortcoming in the privileged user management, especially for systems, databases and
         major assets, is going to be partially mitigated by the full adoption of a specialized tool called
         CyberArk. The installation and the rollout of such tool are envisaged in the MPSP. After the
         mentioned project delay (see finding # 7), such implementation is now scheduled by the end
         of 2018.
    122 Concerning Widiba, the user management process is under control, also thanks to the
         reduced set of assets to manage with respect to the COG. The appointment of the special
         user is based on a strict evaluation of trustworthiness of the administrators.
    123 Moreover, the Widiba network topology allows to better control the access to the production
         environment. In fact, all administrators have to login to an application level proxy gateway,
         Balabit, before administering any production server, also for database administrators and for
         any other activities that require access to the servers. This single access point allows a fine
         privileged access control at least in the production area.
        The Incident Management process
    124 The Incident Management process is triggered by the systems monitoring tools in order to
         ensure the business continuity. The monitoring in terms of availability (hereinafter SIM –
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                               Page 44 of 71

                                                19
           systems incident management)             is distinct from the monitoring against cyber-attacks
                                                                   20
           (hereinafter CIM – cyber incident management) .
      125 Against cyber-attacks, the COG has implemented a Security Operation Centre (hereinafter
                                                                                      21
           SOC). The SOC collects security information (e.g. from CERTFin , suppliers, bulletins) and
           uses a Security Incident and Event Management (hereinafter SIEM, based on the IBM
           QRadar package) to monitor and to detect suspected activities against the BMPS systems. A
           SIEM usually collects data coming from log files (e.g. Microsoft Windows event log files,
           database logs, web servers, Linux/Unix, applications, firewall logs) and examines potential
           attacks on its IT systems based on rules setting native in the system or defined by technical
           users.
      126 Both SIM and CIM processes are aimed at quickly responding to any kind of anomalies
           independently from their source. These processes are carried out, in both forms, with the
           support of an outsourcer: Mauden carries out the SIM process at the COG headquarters
           continuously (24x7); Accenture is remotely monitoring, out of office hours, the SIEM to
           ensure the overall 24x7 service.
      127 Finding # 10 Defects of the security incident management of the COG
  Banca d'Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione IV, transposing artt.
  74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the security of information and IT resources
  must be guaranteed by physical and logical security safeguards and procedures whose strictness
  must be graduated according to the outcomes of the risk evaluation (classification of IT resources
  in terms of security). These measures must be distributed over several layers, and must comprise:
  a) monitoring, through the analysis of logs and audit trails, of accesses, operations and other
  events to prevent and manage IT security incidents; the actions of system administrators and other
  privileged users must be strictly controlled; b) continuous monitoring of security threats and
  vulnerabilities; c) rules for the traceability of actions, in order to permit ex-post verification of critical
19
    The “Servizio Erogazione” is in charge of the Incident Management process. The main ticketing system is
Remedy (by BMC Software) and it is used for the registration of any anomaly detected. Any incident requires
opening a ticket where all the information available to start the remediation phase is reported.
20
    The structure mainly involved is the “Sicurezza Informatica” office, that also carries out the Identity
Management process.
21
   In November 2016, Banca d’Italia and ABI founded CERTFin (https://www.certfin.it/index-eng.html). CERTFin
(the Italian Financial CERT) is a cooperative public-private initiative aimed at increasing the cyber risk
management capacity of banking and financial operators and the overall cyber resilience of the Italian financial
system.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                   Page 45 of 71

operations; the Sezione III states that the residual risk of the IT resources should be submitted for
formal acceptance by the user in charge.
The Comunicazione Banca d’Italia no.846 of 26.06.2017 defines the cyber incident type and the
criteria for reporting the incident to the Banca d’Italia.
Moreover, International standard (ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4 “Assessment of and decision on
information security events”) states that information security events shall be assessed and it shall
be decided if they are to be classified as information security incidents.
The overall cyber incident management (hereinafter CIM) and the related monitoring process is
inadequate, because it is affected by relevant issues in the traceability of the cyber incidents, and in
the coverage of the cyber monitoring tools. In detail:
 a. the CIM policy does not allow to distinguish a cyber incident from a system incident (e.g. a
    hardware failure problem), and, in any case, it has never been applied; in fact, no cyber
    incidents have been so far reported, neither the relevant distributed denial of service (DDOS)
    incident which occurred in January 2017, and blocked the network for about 50 minutes was
    classified as a cyber security incident, although it was among the reasons for the subscription of
    a specific cyber incident insurance in December 2017.
 b. Starting from the previous point observation, the OSI team asked for a new recognition of the
    cyber security incidents. Thus, the bank has detected 12 further cyber incidents which occurred
    in 2016 and 2017, not recorded in any incident management system, not escalated to the IT
    management and formally reported to a responsible function, and not evaluated in their
    severity. In addition to the said DDOS, other two of them emerged for their relevance: a) a web
    server attack that was followed by a forensic analysis; b) a suspicious outflow of about 8
    gigabytes of data that was not investigated by the competent function;
 c. Regarding the data leakage, the bank has not been able to deliver to the OSI team the
    information needed to delve into the event, also because the logs related to the incidents were
    partially unavailable, or the bank could not guarantee their reliability (e.g. the respect of the
    trusted chain); the Security Incident and Event Management (hereinafter SIEM) logs were
    deleted one month after the event although the log management policy states that they have to
    be retained for an adequate time period; the informal analysis of the incident at the event time
    was not able to clarify the content of the outflow of the data. Moreover, such analysis is not
    traceable (e.g. no security precautions were taken such as four eyes controls, safeguarding the
    inalterability of the original data);
 d. The CIM policy envisaged a graduation on 5 severity levels plus the Major incident. The
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 46 of 71

    severity is not based on structured criteria, e.g. those provided by the Banca d'Italia cyber
    incident reporting framework, by a library of threats taxonomy, or linked to a critical
    system/application classification    in terms      of  confidentiality, integrity and availability.
    Furthermore, the first level of the SOC service contract with Accenture considers instead a
    classification on four levels like the one reported in the systems incident management (i.e.
    based on a priority calculated by means of a combination of impact and urgency, but with more
    detailed specifications to evaluate these two values). Moreover, the Major incident specification
    applied to cyber incidents expects to classify in this category any potential breach.
 e. the SIEM is configured according to 11 degrees of severity that are not mapped on the severity
    envisaged in the CIM; the severity of the monitored events in the SIEM is not related to the
    potential target systems, classified in terms of their confidentiality, integrity and availability
    relevance;
 f. a periodic review of the signals detected by the SIEM and of SIEM detection rules is not ruled
    and performed;
 g. the SIEM collects only a subset of information logs. For example, logs are excluded for: the
    applications, the databases, the OIM log, the hosts, the activities of privileged users.
With regard to the latter point, the numbers of missing logs make the SIEM less effective,
preventing the detection of possible offences from the excluded sources and reducing the ability to
correlate events from different sources. Consequently, the controls are mainly oriented to the
perimeter defense.
Finally, during the inspection, the OSI team verified that the OIM audit log registration was
suspended at the beginning of 2016, preventing, among other things, a reconstruction of the
records concerning authorization assigned to the users of MPS Group. However, the decision was
adopted by the ex-chief of COG IT Security without a formal assumption of risk by the responsible
user.
The described deficiencies in the processes expose BMPS to internal and external cyber security
risks, in some cases already incurred, while the shortcoming in detection and classification of the
cyber security incidents harms the bank’s ability to promptly respond.
    128 Although it should have been already carried out in the M+SP, during the inspection, the
         COG presented a very early configuration of the next cyber incident management tool
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 47 of 71

                                                                                            22
          (INCMAN by DFlab, a so called SIRP - security incident response platform ) that is going to
          be adopted, and where all relevant information about attacks, anomalies and user reported
          incidents will be stored. This new platform is going to be integrated with QRadar, ensuring,
          inter alia, the chain of trust.
      129 With regards to the SIEM log retention, it has been extended to 18 months after the
          investigation on the data leakage incident.
      130 Recently, the acquisition of a newer powerful version of the Palo Alto firewall has
          strengthened the external defences through the detection and the automatic reactions to the
          attacks; also, the new system Rake that has consistently reduced the fraud losses is
          effective. On the other hand, internal vulnerabilities still affect the IT security organization as
          reported in the previous finding.
          Widiba
                                                                    23
      131 For the monitoring, Widiba has adopted NAGIOS . The monitoring activity is carried out
          mainly by the outsourcer (Sorint). If a violation of programmed rules occurs, they have to
          contact the specialists in Widiba or try to investigate and solve the problem accessing
          directly the problem sources.
      132 Finding # 11 Defects on IT security in Widiba
  Banca d'Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione IVtransposing artt. 74.1
  and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the security of information and IT resources must
  be guaranteed by physical and logical security safeguards and procedures whose strictness must
  be graduated according to the outcomes of the risk evaluation (classification of IT resources in
  terms of security). These measures must be distributed over several layers, and must comprise: a)
  monitoring, through the analysis of logs and audit trails, of accesses, operations and other events
  to prevent and manage IT security incidents; the actions of system administrators and other
  privileged users must be strictly controlled; b) continuous monitoring of security threats and
  vulnerabilities; c) rules for the traceability of actions, in order to permit ex-post verification of critical
  operations.
  The Comunicazione Banca d’Italia no.846 of 26.06.2017 defines the cyber incident type and the
22
   The current ticketing platform, Remedy, is not considered suitable for such use.
23
   NAGIOS is an open source application that allows the system monitoring on the basis of a set of custom rules.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                   Page 48 of 71

criteria the reporting the incident to the Banca d’Italia.
Moreover, International standard (ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4 “Assessment of and decision on
information security events”) states that information security events shall be assessed and it shall
be decided if they are to be classified as information security incidents. Reference is also made to
CPMI-IOSCO – Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures – Continuous
monitoring.
The policy for Incident Management of Widiba is still in draft form and it does not provide an
incident definition, a severity evaluation, and a quick and clear escalation procedure, also
considering that outsourcers are involved in the process , out of the Widiba headquarters and
outside of working hours.
In the used tool (NAGIOS) the defined detection rules are focused on monitoring the system
availability, not on the cyber threats. Moreover, the monitoring of special user activities, (e.g. the
Balabit accesses), the correlation between such and other kinds of events (e.g. suspicious data
flows, configuration changing) are not considered.
The OSI team verified that, although not formalized in the policy, the incident severity assessment
is based on the number of customers impacted, in particular the number of persons that contacted
Widiba, reporting the anomaly. The considered thresholds do not take into account the evolution of
the total number of customers (e.g. due to the migration of ex BMPS customers envisaged in the
Rondine project), the criticality of the target impacted system and other economical or technical
aspects.
Moreover, despite the technical solution adopted (Balabit) that would allow the monitoring by
means of a single point of access to the production area, all administrators activities are not
monitored and are not reviewed. Moreover, the Widiba Identity Management process does not
impede infringements of the segregation of duties. In particular, this is relevant for those users (e.g.
outsourcer engaged in the incident management process) that carry out system monitoring
activities and are also able to access the same systems with high privileges. The same weakness
is highlighted for those users that are both administrators of Balabit and of the production servers.
These toxic combinations could easily result in a shutdown of any software detected alerts, if
present, or remove or clean logs for unauthorized activities on the main company servers.
The small dimension of Widiba, compared to the whole MPS Group and the separation of the two
platforms, mitigate the risk. However, the weaknesses in the prompt detection of cyber offenses
and in the monitoring of privileged users activities expose Widiba to the potential risk of violation of
confidentiality, integrity and availability.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 49 of 71

     133 During the OSI, the Widiba management started a review of the processes in order to
          mitigate the issues reported in the above finding. For example, the definition of an objective
          methodology to assign the level of severity to the incident and the introduction of a mail-
          based monitoring for the Balabit privileged users. The completion of the activities is
          scheduled by the end of 2018.
3.4    Business continuity management-contingency plans
3.4.1    Background and policies
     134 The BCM perimeter was defined in the setting up phase of the BCM System (hereinafter
          BCMS) more than ten years ago, and has been updated in accordance with the
          requirements listed in the Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 5 –
          “Business Continuity”. The companies of the group belonging to the perimeter are: BMPS,
          MPSCS, MPSL&F, the COG and Widiba.
     135 The organizational model of the MPS Group states that:
         • The parent company issues the guidelines and manages its own BCMS, coordinating the
           other companies;
         • The companies in the BCM perimeter manage their own system;
         • The COG - in addition to managing its BCMS - manages the recovery rooms and the
           Disaster Recovery Plan;
         • Widiba, managing autonomously its IT infrastructure, is responsible for its own Disaster
           Recovery Plan.
     136 As established in the internal policies, the processes with an estimated high impact within 72
                                                                                     24
          hours from the occurrence of their interruption are defined critical ; moreover, on the basis
          of the Comunicazione Banca d’Italia no.0377116 of 07.04.2014, the MPS Group has been
          confirmed as one of the institutions managing processes of systemic relevance, that are: a)
          those related to money and financial instruments settlement systems (e.g. Target2, Espress
          II), b) market access services to regulate liquidity, and c) retail payment services with a
          widespread public use.
24
   The analysis evaluates, for different time bands (1-4 hours, 4-8 hours, 8-24 hours, etc.), the impact level (high,
medium, low) from an economic, regulatory and reputational point of view.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                      Page 50 of 71

     137 The scenarios elaborated by the bank in the Operational Continuity Plan (hereinafter PCO)
         are compliant with the regulations. Furthermore, a cyber-attack scenario was included in the
         policy during the OSI, and it will be considered in the next PCO. A specific plan for the
         “Vesuvio Emergency” is going to be evaluated.
     138 The PCO of the MPS Group and the related Management System are defined by: a) a
         Group policy which defines the methodologies, models and rules adopted by the Group; b)
         three group directives, two of which are in progress that define the organizational model
         adopted by the Group; c) the “Rules on Business Continuity” that gathers all the
         management aspects for the preparation and maintenance of the PCO.
     139 The policy framework is overall complete but it suffers from redundancies that make it
         difficult to maintain and to easily refer to . Therefore, the bank is proceeding in its revision
         with a view, among other things, of streamlining it.
     140 For all the suppliers involved in the processes included in the BCM perimeter, BMPS
         acquires a copy of the relevant PCOs. Among them, the outsourcer Fruendo has a
         significant importance in terms of the number, relevance and extension of the processes
         managed on behalf of the MPS Group. Moreover, the supervisory and control mechanisms
         of external suppliers, involved in critical processes, are being further strengthened.
3.4.2   Procedures
        The Operational Continuity Plan (PCO) and Disaster Recovery procedures
     141 The PCO of MPS Group consists of two main documents:
        • Volume 1: "Continuity Strategies and Management of the Crisis", approved by the BMPS
          BoD on 17.7.2014 and implemented by the other group companies within the perimeter.
        • Volume 2: "Operating procedures for critical and systemic processes" that defines the crisis
          operational management procedures of individual processes. The document is prepared,
          and revised annually by the companies within the perimeter that, through the BIA, detect
          critical or systemic processes.
     142 In 2017, as in 2016, several modifications of the Bank's organizational structure impacted on
         business continuity updating (e.g. changes of the operating units and of the related
         processes). Moreover, the exodus of personnel envisaged in the Restructuring Plan, in
         addition to the normal turnover which occurred in 2017, have changed the human resources
         allocated to the critical processes. The aforementioned events produced the results indicated
         in the following table.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 51 of 71

     143 Table # 8 – Occurred changes in critical processes, and related recovery resources,
         between 2016 and 2017 (source PCO volume 2)
     144 In 2017, all BoDs of the Group companies, belonging to the BCM perimeter, approved the
         update of their PCO after the annual BIA cycleIn 2017, all BoDs of the Group companies,
         belonging to the BCM perimeter, approved the update of their PCO after the annual BIA
         cycle. After these approvals, minor changes have been performed autonomously by the
         BCM Responsible for the MPS Group.
     145 Finding # 12 The BMPS’ PCOs are not complete; the continuity risk could not be
         mitigated for single process due to the inadequate application mapping
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 5, Allegato A, Sezione II
 transposing artt. 74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the BIA, preliminary to the
 drafting of the PCO and periodically updated, identifies the level of risk related to the individual
 business processes and highlights the consequences of the interruption of the service. Moreover,
 for each critical process, the IT support procedures and the technological and communication
 infrastructures used should be identified. Also, according to BCBS-Joint Forum “High-level
 principles for Business Continuity”, an effective BCM includes a recovery strategy that sets out
 recovery objectives and priorities based on the BIA (e.g. most plans sequence the recovery of
 operations coherently with their business impact, focusing first on an organisation’s critical
 operations).
The IT Risk Management has evaluated the risk of the applications, also in terms of availability, in
 the context of the Low Level risk assessment. The perimeter of the critical applications in the IT
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                          Page 52 of 71

 Risk Management analysis was partially different from that identified by the BIA 2017. In fact, the
 OSI team observed that 81 out of 111 critical applications, classified in the two most critical levels
 in the risk analysis, were not present among those identified in the BIA 2017 (e.g. “Gisco Bonifici”:
 management and control application for sending and receiving relevant amount cash transfers,
 “Internet Banking” and “Trading online Web”, “CBI - Paskey Aziende Online": application for the
 flows exchange management with the Consorzio Triveneto). Moreover, in the BIA 2017, for 35 out
 of 74 critical processes, the supporting applications were not specified.
Furthermore, B-Safe - the software for the BIA analysis and the PCO production that registers the
 applications connected to critical processes- receives by the COG’s asset inventory (CMDB) the
 list of the applications but it is not integrated with the list of dependencies among the IT assets
 contained in the CMDB; consequently, the criticality of a component or an infrastructure cannot be
 associated to the critical process it supports. The said information absence could hamper the
 decision-making process, setting the correct priorities (i.e. the recovery strategy) in the recovery of
 infrastructures and applications related to the criticality of the processes, to their dependencies,
 and to possible cut-off dates (e.g. deadlines for tax payment).
Against this backdrop, a full recovery strategy (i.e. Disaster recovery) cannot offset the lack of
 continuity measures and recovery procedures for each process.
Such situation is due to the lack of integration of the systems involved and to the missing
 coordination of the IT risk analysis and of the BIA analysis.
The inconsistency between the outcomes of the risk analysis and the BIA entails the risk that
 critical applications for the Business Continuity are not considered. On the other hand, the lack of
 an adequate component mapping impacts on the effectiveness recovery capacity of single
 process. All this could result in the failure to meet the established Recovery Time Objectives.
      146 Following the audit survey (no. 202/2017 on the Disaster Recovery Test), on 23.01.2018
          BMPS provided the census of the applications missing in the BIA 2017. Lastly, the MPSP
          sub-project "BCM Revamping" envisages , within the year, to integrate the risk analysis
          methodology with the BIA's one.
      147 Within the same "BCM revamping" sub-project, the revision of the COG Disaster Recovery
          Plan is envisaged, in order to make the related procedures more usable in case of
          emergency and to guarantee the completeness with respect to the Widiba perimeter.
      148 The Widiba Disaster Recovery plan focuses only on the front-end production systems (as
          mentioned earlier, the back-end is ensured by the COG). The active-active configuration
          between the data centres of Firenze and Siena ensures an automatic response in case of a
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                              Page 53 of 71

         disruptive event; the Plan provides a series of ex-post checks to confirm the correct
         functioning of the alive site. In view of infrastructural changes, the Plan envisages to carry
         out tests and simulations to ensure the effectiveness of the said configuration. The internal
         systems, instead, linked to the office and development areas, are hosted in Milano at the
         Banca Widiba headquarters and replicated in the server farm in Firenze.
     149 Finding # 13 Weakness in Widiba’s BIA process and in the related risk assumption
         report
 Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 5, Allegato A, Sezione II
 transposing artt. 74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that the BIA, preliminary to the
 preparation of the business continuity plan and periodically updated, identifies the level of risk
 related to individual business processes and highlights the consequences of service interruption.
 Resource allocation and intervention priorities are related to the risk level. The processes related to
 corporate functions particularly relevant for the impact resulting from their unavailability, require
 high levels of business continuity to be achieved through preventive measures and with business
 continuity solutions to be activated in the event of an accident. Furthermore, the body with control
 function is responsible for monitoring the completeness, adequacy, functionality and reliability of
 the business continuity plan. The activity carried out and the decisions taken are adequately
 documented.
 The BIA 2017 of Widiba is incomplete: many fields in the impact assessment questionnaire,
 envisaged by the group policies, were not filled in (e.g. impact level over time after service
 interruption and related description); in addition, the information recorded was inconsistent (e.g.
 high economic impact within four hours for “Organization of team building training activities in the
 Media Center” process). Considering such inconsistencies of the above-mentioned BIA exercise,
 the responsible for Widiba BCM decided both to ignore the BIA’s results and to consider critical
 only the process of "Incident management" (specifically the incident monitoring and control sub-
 process) as in 2016. The reasons behind this choice are not adequately documented: in fact, this
 approach is not explained in the adequacy report nor in other formal documents reported to the
 Widiba and BMPS BoD.
 Therefore, the continuity of Widiba processes is based exclusively on the continuity measures
 applied to the incident monitoring process (i.e. the outsourcer’s PCO and the on-call availability of
 the IT managers), and on the high availability of the Widiba production systems.
 Since Widiba is an online bank, the unavailability of the web site or part of its functionality is
 subject to significant reputational impacts (e.g. the process of securities buying and selling has an
 RTO of four hours), but it is not possible to guarantee continuity of intervention on critical
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 54 of 71

   applications (e.g. a software fix installation) in case of unavailability of the development and testing
   systems, located in Milano and, therefore, not in the disaster recovery configuration. In fact, the
   restoration of such systems on the alternative site of Firenze may require up to 12 hours.
  The said weakness of the BIA process are due to: a) the lack of awareness of the personnel
  responsible for the BIA assessment; b) the inadequate supervision by the group function
  responsible (ASI) for ensuring the congruence of PCO; c) the Widiba census of business processes
  is too granular (504 functional processes and 869 operational processes), implying a heavy burden
  in completing the questionnaires; d) the lack of an IT compliance function (see finding # 5).
  The absence of an effective identification of critical processes and related continuity measures
  could result in the failure of Business Continuity risk mitigation.
       150 The Widiba processes will be remapped and codified using the same taxonomy adopted by
           the group (using the application “ARIS”) and, starting from 2019, the bank will make use of
           the same procedure as BMPS – B-Safe – to manage directly its BIA cycle.
          Testing strategy and execution
       151 The Bank adopted a three-year test plan on Operational Continuity Measures for the period
           2015-2017 with the aim of strengthening the methods of supervision of the BCM tests. This
           plan provides realistic tests of the systemic processes over a three-year period and partial
           procedures every year. The processes identified as critical for business continuity purposes
           were tested with three-year rolling tests (even partial). Moreover, as a response to the 2016
           audit findings, more realistic modalities have been adopted (i.e. unexpected tests) starting
           from the second half of 2017.
       152 The BCM test plan can be considered adequate and was substantially complied with in the
           2015-2017 period; the same guidelines have been confirmed for the 2018-2020 test plan
           (BoD of 05.04.2018).
       153 The test of the Disaster Recovery plan, managed by the COG, is performed on a yearly
                                                                                           25
           basis. In December 2016, the simulation was done in "third copy" mode . Such a smaller
           and less realistic scenario was adopted because the secondary data centre of Siena was the
           primary site until the swap with the one located in Firenze in September 2016, and no
25
    The simulation was performed through the creation of an isolated testing system with access to a database
resulting from the copy of production data, restored after the abrupt and unordered closing of the synchronous
data flow between primary and secondary databases.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                  Page 55 of 71

          technical changes had occurred in the meantime. In 2017, on the other hand, a more realistic
          test was carried out with the provision of services from the secondary site on Saturday 2
          December and the participation, among the other stakeholders, of two BMPS branches that
          operated regularly and transparently in relation to the supply site.
     154 In 2017, Widiba carried out the BCM test on its own critical process and participated in the
          COG Disaster Recovery test to check the proper functioning of its front-end, in case that
          back-end services are provided by the recovery site of the COG.
     155 Finding # 14 The COG Disaster Recovery test cannot demonstrate the respect of the
          restart time limits for systemic processes
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 5, Allegato A, Sezione
IItransposing artt. 74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that, at least once a year
comprehensive tests must be carried out, based on scenarios that are as realistic as possible, of
the operational recovery of critical processes in crisis conditions, observing the ability of the
organization to carry out the measures laid down in the business continuity plan in accordance with
the time schedule established. Furthermore, the special requirements for the systemic relevance
processes (Sezione III), state that the restart time (i.e. the time required, excluding the decision
time, for the implementation of the technical and organizational interventions in order to restore the
services availability in safe conditions) does not exceed two hours.
The Disaster Recovery test in 2016, carried out on a restricted and isolated scenario (“third copy”
mode with the exception of distributed systems), resulted in an overall restart time of 2:34 hh/ mm.
Moreover, the “Paschi Face“ application did not restart due to a misconfiguration of the test
environment. The Disaster Recovery test in 2017, designed to provide all services from the
secondary site for 24 hours, highlighted a restart time of almost four hours for the overall systems
(while only the ATM service were recovered in about 1:40 hh/mm). In both the 2016 and 2017
tests, it was not possible to establish if the systemic processes were available before the complete
restart because, except for the ATM service, the user testing procedure started at the end of the
whole recovery process.
The COG Disaster Recovery solution is based on the duplication of almost all the IT infrastructures
between the primary and secondary data centre, but the recovery strategy is not consistent with the
business impact analysis since it was developed before the introduction of the BCM and not
subsequently reviewed, in order to distinguish critical technological resources from those of lower
importance by mapping dependencies between application software components and critical
business processes (see finding # 12). By consequence, the testing procedures (apart from the
ATM operational tests) have not been designed to ascertain the recovery of the critical and
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 56 of 71

  systemic processes within the respective restart time limits.
  Therefore, it is not possible to guarantee that in the event of a real disaster, systemic processes will
  be restored within the restart time of two hours provided in the regulation.
      156 At the end of the OSI MPS has been excluded from the list of operators having to comply
          with the most strict requirements for systemic processes. Even so, MPS can further take part
                                                                                        26
          in the CODISE activities as part of the second-level systemic operators .
         Continuous improvement
      157 BMPS, along with the COG and Widiba, have processes in place to overcome the issues
          arising from the BCM and Disaster recovery tests, from the audit findings, from the
          Accenture's Maturity Assessment (commissioned at the end of 2016, from which the "BCM
          Revamping" plan was born), as well as the lessons learned from accidents. Among them
          could be mentioned:
         • New operating instructions, issued by the parent company in September 2017, to improve
           the effectiveness of the recovery rooms (e.g. monitoring and maintaining the recovery
           workstations) and virtual workstations adoption allowing to overcome the constraint of the
           current recovery stations, physically located mainly in Siena and Firenze;
         • Online course on the basic concepts of the BCM, updated at the end of 2017 and provided
           to the roughly 250 primary and recovery resources of BMPS;
         • Integrated test execution between Fruendo and BMPS;
         • Specific monitoring measures to correctly detect the restart time of critical and systemic
           processes (envisaged by the end of the year).
3.4.3    Reporting
      158 Every year the BMPS BoD is informed, through the adequacy report of the Group BCM
          Manager, on the effectiveness of the BCM system, the tuning and improvement activities, the
          tests’ results and the management of human and instrumental recovery resources.
          Moreover, the BoD yearly approves the PCO, previously shared with the Operational Risk
          Management, and submitted to the Risk Committee.
26
   The CODISE is the coordination structure of the operational crises of the Italian financial market. The MPS
Group participates in the CODISE tests (the latest in June 2017).
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                  Page 57 of 71

3.5     Data quality management
3.5.1     Background and Policies
      159 In 2015, the Institution, in order to be fully compliant with the requirements listed in the
           Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285, Part I, Title IV, Chapter 4 – “Information System”, setup a
           project with a multi-year horizon, the “Data Governance” project, in order to implement a
           formal and documented data governance and data quality framework at group level, called
                                                                                                 27
           “Standard di Data Governance” (Data Governance Standard, hereinafter DGS) .
      160 The regulatory framework, which is considered adequate by the OSI team, is composed of
           the policy, adopted in September 2016 (“Data Governance Policy”) that defines principles
           and high-level data governance model, and of three directives, adopted in June 2017 which
           defines: a) the organizational model implemented in terms of responsibility for the Data
           Management System; b) the perimeter of information (which is composed of business
           information related to the relevant outputs defined within the Data Governance Project); c)
           and the data quality management framework. The implementation of the said project is
           currently focused exclusively on BMPS.
      161 The overall Data Governance Process is managed by the Data governance and Reporting
           Management Service (placed under the Planning Area within the CFO Direction), which is
           led by the Chief Data Officer (hereinafter “CDO”), currently identified in the Head of Planning
           area, and in charge of addressing strategic activities in this sector. The organizational
           framework adopted by the bank envisages a strong cooperation between the business units
           that oversee the management and production of data, and the IT function, responsible for the
           management of the Data Governance platform and the development of technical controls.
3.5.2     Procedures
      162 The criteria chosen by BMPS to define the relevant perimeter of data to be involved in the
           Data Governance system were defined considering the more sensitive information areas
           subject to regulatory requirements (e.g. Anti-money laundering, compliance, risks, credit,
           financial statements, banking supervision). For each information area, BMPS selected some
27
   The TRIM-2017-ITMPS-2939 reported in the chapter 2.3 Data Quality Process information on the mentioned
project focused on the application to the perimeter of the model credit risk parameter and raised the finding # 3
“Data quality framework; data quality dimensions and controls¸ data quality roles and responsibilities” already
reported to BMPS. The OSI team did not overlap in its observations with the issues raised in the mentioned
finding.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                   Page 58 of 71

          “Relevant Outputs” (hereinafter RO), i.e. reports, information, databases, whose importance
          involves both the Bank's internal reporting (e.g. commercial monitoring) and the external
          ones (e.g. LCR, Finrep). In 2016, over 400 RO were initially identified by the bank. Given the
          complexity of the scope and the limited resources, the Institution decided to concentrate its
          efforts on a limited perimeter, defined on the priority of intervention criteria, of about 46 RO.
      163 The perimeter currently covers only the Parent Company areas; according to the CDO, a
          “sufficiently” large perimeter should be reached in at least 36 months with an estimated
          investment effort of € 4 mln. In the future, the bank would gradually extend the perimeter
          based on the priority needs recognized, in the following areas: audit; commercial; Customer
          Relationship Management (CRM); human resources; customer database and other customer
          data.
      164 With reference to the RO the bank wants to increase the data governance maturity, being
          currently positioned according to the scheme of the figure below.
      165 Figure # 13 – BMPS data governance maturity chart (source 2017 annual report on
          Data Governance)
      166 For the operational application of the Data Governance system, three main tools have been
          implemented by the bank: a) Business Glossary: it is the catalogue that collects all the
          elements of the Data Governance System (e.g. Areas, Roles, Relevant Outputs). For 61% of
                                                                                      28
          46 RO, about 10,000 Business Data Element (hereinafter BDE ) were registered and
28
   A business information element which constitutes or contributes to the production of a Relevant Output
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                    Page 59 of 71

       mapped in the Business Glossary; b) Piattaforma controlli: in this application (Irion DQ was
       the platform selected) the Data Quality Controls available on the RO are registered (Data
       Control Dictionary); for those directly codified in the platform, the checks are automatically
       executed, summarized at various levels of aggregation and reported. Other controls,
       automatic and manual checks, are only mapped in the platform and executed in other
       processes/procedures. As of 31.12.2017, about 800 data quality checks had been developed
       directly on the platform; c) Remediation: fails in the checks could activate a remediation
       process through the IT ticketing platform (Remedy); the data governance platform
       automatically opens a ticket towards the IT function and it allows the monitoring of its life
       cycle. The ticket is managed with the same tools used in the Incident Management process
       (Remedy) that starts a workflow towards a responsible owner. Currently, the ticketing
       process is managed only by the IT function without a clear identification and definition of
       Data Quality incidents in the Group’s system and the involvement of the bank network in
       remediation, for example in the case of incorrect data entry (see finding # 15). The bank
       expects to overcome these criticalities in 2018.
   167 To analyse the effectiveness of the Data Governance project the OSI focused on findings
       and recommendations about data quality issues emerged consequently to ECB inspections;
       two of such issues were sampled from two OSIs on credit risk: a) Recommendation no. 12 of
       OSI-2015-ITMPS-34-35 follow-up letter, according to which, the Institution should upgrade
       and update the database to include all relevant information about collateral; b) Finding no. 3
       of OSI-2016-ITMPS-12-38, according to which, among other things, for a significant number
       of properties the cadastral data are partially or totally missing. In this regard, in 2016 the
       bank setup the project “Argo” with the aim to include the information and the documentation
       related to mortgages granted after 01.01.2012 (approximately 380,000). As of 31 December
       2017, the bank estimates that anomalies in the cadastral values arise in 1.44% out of
       380,000 properties (source elaboration on DWH). However, the remedial actions were
       followed only by the Data Owner function (i.e. the Chief Lending Officer), without a
       coordination mechanism with the CDO function and with the Data Governance project (see
       next finding).
   168 The design of the process and of the procedures is, in general, adequate, but the state of the
       art is still at an early stage; for example the missing definition of Key Quality Indicators
       (hereinafter KQIs), implementation issues, or limits in the coordination of the initiatives give
       rise to criticalities, highlighted in the following finding.
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                           Page 60 of 71

    169 Finding # 15 Delay in the implementation of Data Governance project
Banca d’Italia Circolare no. 285/2013, Parte I, Titolo IV, Capitolo 4, Sezione V, transposing artt.
74.1 and 88 of Directive EU no. 36/2013, states that a company standard for data governance must
be instituted, defining the roles and the responsibilities of the functions involved in the use and
processing of corporate information for operational and management purposes and, in relation to
the importance of data sets for the information system, mechanisms to measure and guarantee
data quality, e.g. through a key quality indicator system, that should be periodically reported to
business users, to control functions and to the management body. The identification, measurement,
assessment, monitoring, prevention and mitigation of the risks associated with data quality must be
part of the risk management process.
Moreover, BCBS 239 principles 1-11 about Overarching Governance and Infrastructure, Risk Data
Aggregation Capabilities, and risk Reporting Practices ask institutions to implement an effective
data quality framework with several specific requirements.
The Data Governance project in BMPS started in April 2016, but the activities were based only on
the publication of an ineffective group policy successively replaced. Also due to such delay, the
project is still at an early stage. As a consequence, a scant perimeter has been covered both from
a horizontal and a vertical view:
 1. from a horizontal perspective, the complexity and the vastness of the perimeter still require
    many activities, considering that on about 400 Relevant Outputs (hereinafter RO) initially
    identified in half of the information areas (e.g. commercial, audit, customer database are
    excluded), the Institution selected only a perimeter of 46 of them. Regarding these 46 RO, the
    coverage is incomplete (e.g. missing the mapping of the existing controls of Sisba, the main
    application for regulatory reporting, in the Irion DQ platform). In the activities only the Parent
    Company and the COG are involved, while the other entities of the Group are excluded;
 2. from a vertical point of view, a data quality indicators system (e.g. based on key quality
    indicators) was not in place, preventing an effective monitoring; this implies that performances
    metrics are not available, in order to objectively measure the overall data quality and that of the
    RO (i.e. a synthetic indicator that informs the Institution’s Senior Management about the data
    quality risk). Moreover, metrics or judgmental evaluation of the completeness of the Data
    Quality Controls, with respect to the information area in scope, are not implemented or
    formalised.
The ticketing process currently involves only the IT function, without the engagement of the Data
Owners able to organize the remediation, also through the contribution of the customer managers
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                             Page 61 of 71

 in the network.
 Moreover, the Chief Data Officer (hereinafter CDO) has not been involved to address findings on
 data quality issues emerged during ECB OSIs. Consequently, remediation actions were developed
 to clean anomalies in the cadastral values in the database of the immovable properties, but such
 data are not included in the RO and not managed in the new Data Quality framework (e.g.
 implementing automatic controls to avoid future degradation of such cleaned-up information, or to
 monitor the effectiveness of the follow up activities), highlighting a not integrated approach to the
 addressing of data quality issues in the bank.
 Finally, in the first five months of 2018, Data Governance and data quality topics were never
 discussed in other Board or managerial committees, despite the abolition of the Data Governance
 Committee previously in charge of the data governance coordination.
 The Data Governance project, considering the need for a three-year time horizon and not bringing
 perceivable benefits given the abovementioned limits, entails an increasing execution risk, i.e. to
 not achieve its goals in terms of coverage of the perimeter and in terms of maturity. Moreover, a
 risk of fragmentation and coordination of the initiatives concerning data developments is concrete,
 given that the bank has adopted a decentralized approach and is conducting other initiatives (data
 expansion, closing of ECB findings) that are managed outside the Data Governance perimeter.
     170 A prototype of KQIs based on balanced scorecards was drafted in May 2018. It covers 7 RO,
          mainly in the internal model area, and it summarizes the results of the controls, the remedial
          actions and a qualitative indicator based on a self-assessment.
3.5.3    Reporting
     171 Starting from 2017, the Data Owners, for each covered area for which they are responsible,
          produce a Data Quality Report related to the RO in their perimeter. The overall outcome of
          such reporting is quarterly summarized to the CDO. The reporting process is carried out for
          the most part through qualitative "self-risk assessment" filled in standard forms by the data
          owner, and, for others, through the centralized control platform (Irion DQ). Currently the
          reporting on the RO is focused not only on the data quality outcomes but also on the
          activities linked to the project (e.g. data modeling).
     172 The CDO function yearly publishes a report for the CEO named “Rapporto di Sintesi Annuale
          di Data Governance”, in which it summarizes the activities carried out during the year and it
          presents the priorities for the coming year.
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                            Page 62 of 71

3.5.4   Other connected projects
     173 In the second half of 2017, the Institution, launched a project (“Risk Reporting according to
         PERDAR”) focused on the Risk Reporting target model, and on the highest-level reports to
         Corporate Bodies and senior management, in order to comply with the principles 7-11 about
         risk reporting practices of the BCBS 239. In this context, on 05.01.2018 the BoD approved
         the “Direttiva di Gruppo in materia di Integrated Risk Reporting” (Group Directive on
         Integrated Risk Reporting) defining the related organizational model. It outlines the risk
         reporting framework, the governance, the risk reporting model, the relevant risk flows, and
         roles and responsibilities. Some parts of the directive are not yet implemented and the
         project is at an early stage.
     174 The Swiffer initiative is a regular activity implemented by the COG at the end of 2016, for the
         execution of massive technical controls (e.g. presence of control characters in strings;
         checks on dates) on the data warehouse (hereinafter DWH) system that is one of the most
         important data base for the reporting. In 2017, the controls had about 1.5 mln executions;
         44,282 columns (4.5% of the total DWH columns) were examined on priority basis, and
         about 1.3 bn values were checked. Since the activation of the initiative, remediation actions
         have been undertaken that have led to a considerable reduction in the anomalies (from 567
         mln to 33 mln occurrences in absolute terms, from 535 anomalous items out of 1 mln to 26
         out of 1 mln).
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                           Page 63 of 71

4    Detailed table of contents
1         Scope and Executive Summary                                          5
1.1       Scope                                                                5
1.2       Executive Summary                                                    6
2         Table of findings                                                  10
3         Report Details                                                     11
3.1       General requirements                                               11
3.1.1     Organisational framework                                           11
3.1.1.1   Governance                                                         11
3.1.1.2   Organisational structure and resources                             13
3.1.2     Strategic planning and budgeting                                   15
3.1.3     Risk profile, risk appetite and risk strategy                      26
3.1.4     IT Compliance                                                      31
3.1.5     IT Audit                                                           31
3.2       System architecture                                                32
3.3       IT security management                                             36
3.3.1     The Monte Più Sicuro and Monte Protect Shield projects             36
3.3.2     Policies                                                           40
3.3.3     Procedures                                                         41
3.4       Business continuity management-contingency plans                   50
3.4.1     Background and policies                                            50
3.4.2     Procedures                                                         51
3.4.3     Reporting                                                          57
3.5       Data quality management                                            58
3.5.1     Background and Policies                                            58
3.5.2     Procedures                                                         58
3.5.3     Reporting                                                          62
3.5.4     Other connected projects                                           63
4         Detailed table of contents                                         64
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                Page 64 of 71

5            Table of tables                                                                                                                                             65
6            Table of figures                                                                                                                                            65
7            Annexes                                                                                                                                                     67
7.1          Annex 1 – Abbreviations                                                                                                                                     67
5     Table of tables
 7           Table # 1 – BMPS Group main figures at 31.03.2018 (source MPS Planning area) _____________ 6
 8           Table # 2 – BMPS main shareholder at 01.07.2017 (source CONSOB web site) ________________ 7
 23          Table # 3 - Table of findings ________________________________________________________ 11
 39          Table # 4 – Envisaged trend in COG employees (source COG organisation function) __________ 15
 49          Table # 5 –Provisional cash out trends of the COG (source COG Planning and Control) ________ 18
 54          Table # 6 – Revenues from COG customers in 2017 (source COG Financial Statements as at
 31.12.2017) _______________________________________________________________________________ 20
 62          Table # 7 – Project plan 2016-2018 (source CP&CO) ____________________________________ 22
 143         Table # 8 – Occurred changes in critical processes, and related recovery resources, between
 2016 and 2017 (source PCO volume 2) _________________________________________________________ 52
6     Table of figures
 11          Figure # 1 – BMPS Group simplified structure (source IT Strategic Guidelines 17.04.2018) ............ 8
 33          Figure # 2 – The IT Security and BC structure in MPS (source Organizational chart MPS dated
 March 2018) ........................................................................................................................................................ 13
 34          Figure # 3 – The COG’s IT Security structure (source Organizational chart COG dated March 2018)14
 36          Figure # 4 – COG simplified organizational chart (source Reorganization of the COG dated
 20.10.2017) .......................................................................................................................................................... 14
 42          Figure # 5 – The IT structure in Widiba (source Organizational chart Widiba dated 21.03.2018) . 15
 46          Figure # 6 – TCO of the COG compared to the market (source COG Planning and Control) ........... 16
 71          Figure # 7 – Running expenses (source elaboration of COG Planning and Control) ....................... 26
 74          Figure # 8 IT risk Risk Appetite Assesment (source IT Risk Report 2017) ....................................... 27
 91          Figure # 9 – BMPS IT Architectural scheme (source presentation “Application Architecture – As is
 situation”) 33
 96          Figure # 10 – BMPS IT Network scheme (source presentation “Network architecture of the Data
 Centres”) 35
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                                                                      Page 65 of 71

106        Figure # 11 – Monte protect shield project structure (source Project presentation) ...................... 38
111        Figure # 12 – Cyber-risk insurance (source Memo for the BoD of 14.11.2017 about the
subscription of a Cyber-risk insurance) ............................................................................................................... 40
165        Figure # 13 – BMPS data governance maturity chart (source 2017 annual report on Data
Governance) ........................................................................................................................................................ 59
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                                                                    Page 66 of 71

7    Annexes
7.1   Annex 1 – Abbreviations
 ABBREVIATION       MEANING
 AIRB               Advanced Internal Rating Based Approach
 ASI                Area Sicurezza Integrata / Integrated Security Area
 BCBS               Basel Committee Banking Supervision
 BCM                Business Continuity Management
 BCMS               BCM System
 BDE                Business Data Element
 BIA                Business Impact Analysis
 BOL                Banking Online
 BMPS               Banca Monte dei Paschi
 BR                 Business Requirements
 bps                Basis points
 BoD                Board of Directors
 BoSA               Board of Statutory Auditors
 CEO                Chief Executive Officer
 CCO                Chief Commercial Officer
 CET1               Common Equity Tier 1
 CDO                Chief Data Officer
 CFO                Chief Financial Officer
 CIA                Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                       Page 67 of 71

CIM              Cyber Incident Management
COG              Consorzio Operativo di GruppoMontePaschi (Operational Consortium Monte
                 dei Paschi Group)
COO              Chief Operating Officer
COP              Comitato Operativo Progetti (Operational Project Committeee)
Corep            Common Reporting
CMDB             Component Management Database
CP&CO            Chief Program & Cost Officer
CRR              Capital Requirement Regulation (Regulation 575/2013/EU)
CRD IV           Capital Requirement Regulation (Directive 2013/36/EU)
DGS              Data Governance Standard
DWDM             Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing
DWH              Data Warehouse
D-SIB            Domestic Systemically Important Bank
EBA              European Banking Authority
ECB              European Central Bank
Finrep           Financial Reporting
GM               General Manager
KQI              Key Quality Indicator
KRI              Key Risk Indicator
IA               Internal Audit
IEC              International Electrotechnical Commission
IM               Identity Management
ISO              International Organisation for Standardization
IT               Information Technology
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                              Page 68 of 71

ITIL             Information Technology Infrastructure Library
ITS-BCM          IT Security and BCM
LS-OC            Logical Security and Operational Continuity
MC               Comitato Direttivo (Management Committee)
MPS Group        Banca Monte dei Paschi Group
MPSLF            MPS Leasing e Factoring
MPSCS            MPS Capital Services
M+SP             Monte più Sicuro Project
MPSP             Monte Protect Shield Project
NBO              Non-Binding Offers
NIST             National Institute of Standards and Technology
NCA              Nuovo Controllo Accessi (New Access Control)
OIM              Oracle Identity Management
OMR              Operazioni di Maggior Rilievo (greater importance transactions)
OSI              On-site Inspection
O-SII            Other Systemically Important Institutions
Q&A              Questions and Answers
PCO              Operational Continuity Plan
PMO              Project Management
RO               Relevant Output
RTO              Recovery Time Objective
SAN              Storage Area Network
SIM              Systems Incident Management
SIEM             Security Incident and Event Management
SOC              Security Operation Centre
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                                 Page 69 of 71

SSO              Single Sign On
VLAN             Virtual Local Area Network
24X7             24 hours for 7 days
ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                            Page 70 of 71

 Feedback from the inspected bank
        Part of the report
                                        Inspected institution’s
     the institution wants to                                   HoM response
                                        comments or remarks
                       29
          comment on
E.g.       Text ABC from Para 50
Para
50
29
   Please copy the commented part of the report
 ECB-CONFIDENTIAL                                                           Page 71 of 71

