 Feedback from the inspected bank
       Part of the report
   the institution wants to             Inspected institution’s comments or remarks                HoM response
                         1
         comment on
Par 51     Finding # 1              The strategic reflection on the evolution of the Consorzio
           Uncertainties in the     starts with the top management’s awareness that the
           definitions of strategic Consorzio is able to set and sustain the objectives of the
           options of the MPS       Restructuring Plan within a process of ongoing
           Group                    improvement, as defined and detailed in the IT Strategic
                                    Guidance document approved by MPS’ Board of Directors
                                    on 17 April 2018.
                                    This awareness is confirmed by the updates regularly
                                    provided to the MPS BoD on cost trends (which are ahead
                                    of the plan objectives), on the focus given to important
                                    projects (strategic, relevant and mandatory) and on the
                                    increasing timeliness in the end-to-end implementation
                                    required.
                                    The same OSI IT Risk report, while highlighting a number
                                    of weaknesses and issues reported in the findings,
                                    confirms that “the current IT structure of the MPS Group
                                    can adequately support the requirements of the bank
                                    within the horizon of the Restructuring Plan, needing,
                                    however, a clear definition of the strategies and
                                    improvements in the project development”.
                                    The MPS BoD is therefore in the favourable condition of
                                    not being obliged to find alternatives to the current
                                    situation and to be able to freely examine the expressions
                                    of interest put forward by some important national and
                                    international players in the IT market.
                                    MPS and these players are aware that the Consorzio is
                                    unique in terms of size, volumes, completeness of its
                                    features and compliance with ECB and non-ECB
                                    requirements and is not comparable with other national
                                    operations (smaller in terms of size or scope of activity), as
                                    reported in the OSI IT Risk Report.
                                    The lack of true market alternatives will allow MPS to be a
                                    “first mover” in the process to rationalise the IT market in
                                    banks and, with the right partner and the right level of risk,
                                    to obtain economic and/or qualitative benefits, for instance
                                    by sharing investments in common initiatives (such as
                                    regulations) and creating a target IT platform starting from
                                    that of the Consortium.
                                    MPS’ evaluation procedure is taking place on the basis of
                                    a structured process whose timing is influenced by the
                                    definition of the restructuring plan negotiated in 2017 and
                                    by the corporate developments within the MPS Group.
                                    As of April 2018, the MPS Board has been constantly kept
                                    updated on the expressions of interest and involved in all
                                    evaluations while the internal work group has been
                                    integrated with the skills required for a business,
                                    economic, technological, legal and labour-law assessment
                                    as well as a risk assessment of the different scenarios.
                                    The same BoD of 5 September also approved the MPS
                                    Group’s      Digital    strategy    and     discussed      the
                                    interdependencies of the Venere project. The next step is
                                    expected in the BoD in November, during which the non-
1
  Please copy the commented part of the report

                              binding proposal received will be evaluated.
Par 68 Finding # 2 Delays in  During the process to collect the 2019 project
       strategic and relevant requirements, a new approach was adopted that by
       projects and           directly involving the COG in assessing the proposals for
       inadequate             projects with an IT impact, with an estimation of economic
       involvement of the IT  and financial resources and the preparation of a capacity
       function in the group  plan to support the development of project activities.
       IT planning            The project management process has been recently
                              simplified by moving the Demand function to within the
                              COG’s scope of activity, thereby reinforcing the integration
                              between the technical and business components - thus
                              optimising the drafting of technical specifications (Business
                              Requirements/BR) which are preliminary to the execution
                              of IT measures - and reducing implementation times. The
                              COG’s Demand has adopted a timely monitoring process
                              for the BRs in order to keep under control the times
                              employed to cross the various stages of their lifecycle.
                              Furthermore, as part of the recent reorganisation of the
                              Parent Company, the Chief Program & Cost Officer Area
                              was reallocated to within the COO Division’s area of
                              responsibility, thereby creating a functional synergy with
                              both the organisational units as well as those managing
                              outsourced services, which, under the new structure, also
                              monitors the service level of the COG’s demand function.
                              The new Cost Management, Projects and Service Quality
                              Area (Area GCPQS), reporting directly to the COO, carries
                              out all project monitoring activities as well as a direct PMO
                              function for all Strategic Projects, supporting the project
                              management bodies.
                              Regarding the latter, the responsibility for project
                              monitoring and assessments, is mainly concentrated under
                              the Project Operational Committee (or COP), which fulfils
                              these requirements for all the relevant discretionary and
                              mandatory projects, while the Strategic Projects, (large,
                              highly-complex Change Projects) are under the direct
                              supervision of the Executive Committee, which uses the
                              COP and the individual Divisions for the preliminary
                              procedures, and receives regular updates from the
                              GCPQS Area on the overall progress of project activities.
                              Monitoring of strategic initiatives and the main relevant and
                              mandatory activities has also been strengthened with the
                              introduction of monthly Steering Committees, organised for
                              each project owner Division, which see the participation of
                              first-line management.
                              Regarding Other Projects (projects with limited unit
                              spending and low inter-functional complexity), which in the
                              past caused a more than proportional absorption of
                              implementation resources, their inclusion in the COP’s
                              scope of responsibility is currently being assessed
                              (particularly with regard to the product Plans plafond and
                              to the GAP resolution Plans, which are characterised by a
                              high implementation priority). In this way, the discretion of
                              the Divisions will be reduced further, and they would be
                              responsible for a limited scope of changes required.
                              The structure envisaged and the process changes adopted
                              and being adopted are aimed at strengthening project
                              planning and management processes, with the aim to
                              better define the scope of activity, making it more
                              compatible with cost and capacity limits, and resulting in
                              shorter and more certain implementation times.
                              The main procedural changes outlined above, will be
                              incorporated in the company’s internal regulations, which
                              will be duly updated by February 2019.

Par 78 Finding # 3 The gaps The Operational Risk Function incorporates the inspection
       of the COG IT        findings in its assessments and checks regarding the level
       security were        of security posture compliant with the risk tolerance
       unfoundedly closed   established in the RAF. During the assessment of the
       by the IT Risk       closure of the individual gaps, the analysis will be repeated
       Management           to verify the residual risk following the mitigation
       weakening the        measures.
       effectiveness of the
       remedial actions
Par 80 Finding # 4          WIDIBA
       Weaknesses of the    A review of the Top Level indicators is currently in
       Group IT risk        progress. In addition, the inventory of IT resources subject
       assessment           to Low Level analysis was also revised, with an increase in
                            the level of granularity of the infrastructural components.
                            Finally, we intend to improve the methods for conducting
                            the analyses of assets with specific attention being given
                            to any security aspects and a greater level of investigation.
                            The activities carried out have been agreed on between
                            Widiba and the Parent Company.
                            The closing date estimated is within the first quarter of
                            2019. Some of the implementations carried out will be
                            used for risk analysis by year-end. The new indicators on
                            security incidents and corrective fixes on software will be
                            introduced subsequent to the start of the Incident process
                            and its tuning according to the deadlines indicated in
                            finding #11 below.
                            Consorzio
                            In June 2018, the Consorzio began to track security
                            offenses and incidents through the new IncMan platform;
                            the set of information regarding the incidents tracked, as
                            well as the severity classification criteria still need to be
                            fine-tuned (as identified in finding #12). A risk indicator
                            based on this monitoring will be introduced in 2019.
                            As regards the BitSight indicator, the Operational Risk
                            Function and the Consorzio have already agreed on a new
                            rating scale, with more conservative thresholds, which will
                            be applied as of January 2019. Additional corrective
                            measures will be evaluated in 2019, based on positioning
                            with respect to the individual risk vectors which BitSight
                            includes in the calculation of its rating.
                            With regard to the finding concerning the failure to analyse
                            all the critical assets in the business continuity perimeter, it
                            should be noted that the classification of such critical
                            resources has been taken as a priority factor in the
                            selection of assets included in the annual risk analysis
                            perimeters: out of 86 critical assets, 70 were already
                            analysed between the end of 2015 and 2017; 12 are in the
                            process of being analysed within the 2018 perimeter; 4
                            have not been analysed since they are going to be
                            dismissed or because similar to others already analysed
                            (the reports on the four critical applications cited as not
                            analysed are available to the Inspectors).
Par 84 Finding # 5 The IT    Although the title of the finding does not reflect the
       Compliance function   current situation, the detailed description provided in the
       was not activated in  inspection report (paragraph 3.1.4) is acceptable and
       Widiba                already recognises the fact that activities have been
                             started.
                             The detailed plan for the controls cycle has been shared
                             with Widiba’s local Compliance referent, according to the
                             duration identified on the basis of available resources.
Par 87 Finding # 6 The       No specific comment or remark on the paragraph.
       scope of IT Audit     The finding will be addressed within the 2019 and 2020
       Plan is limited and   audit plans in order to provide full assurance, as
       only partially        required, about the assessment of the main technological

    adequate to mitigate     risks and of the bank’s overall management of IT risk
    the IT Risk              over the overall 3-year audit cycle (2018-2020).
Par  Finding # 7 The       The establishment of the Monte Protect Shield Project,
108  Monte Più Sicuro      which encompasses the Monte Più Sicuro Project,
     and Monte Protect     introduced, in the course of 2018, a rigorous and orderly
     Shield projects have  approach in the project’s management, which gave a
     not        adequately decisive impulse to the implementation of the plan’s
     removed           the initiatives.
     weaknesses of the     More specifically, the:
     COG IT Security        - adoption of group rules on project management through
     emerged in the 2015       the involvement of a Steering Committee made up of
     analysis                  first line managers and a structured monitoring process
                               according to project management rules.
                            - stable and profitable integration between Parent
                               Company and IT skills
                            - increased accountability resulting from a risk-oriented
                               approach, with the inclusion of the Risk function in
                               project management.
                           have led to all key deliverables being achieved on time.
                           These include the:
                            - extension of the 24H first level SOC Service to under
                               Accenture’s SOC
                            - revision and implementation of data masking of the
                               Central System test environment
                            - activation and implementation of the system for the
                               detection and management of security incidents
                               (offenses and/or incidents)
                            - assessment of application components on the
                               departmental systems (ATM, Server Linux, Server
                               Windows) which use together with: the activation of a
                               quarterly control process; the revision of Security
                               standards; the implementation of the Architectural and
                               Security Monitoring process.
                            - activation, on a representative sample, of the solution
                               for detection of Authorisations on documents present
                               within the Team Site and network files
                            - revision of the Architecture of the authorisation system
                               for the branch front-end application (Paschiface)
                            - revision and implementation of the perimeter defence
                               system with the application of new security rules
                            - activation of new solutions for identifying the
                               Vulnerabilities present in our systems and control
                               activities
                            - activation of the security control gate within the DevOps
                               cycle for applications with external exposure via internet
                            - revision of network architecture for securing the
                               technical-application infrastructure of the Digital Banking
                               and Paschi Azienda Online systems.
                           Under completion by the end of the year:
                            - Extension to BMPS of new Internet browsing
                               infrastructure
                            - Monitoring of System Administrators for departmental
                               environment
                            - Update for the new Identity Management infrastructure
                               for the entire production environment
                            - Activation of the PC encryption function (Bitlocker) for
                               most of the General Management Division
                            - Activation of the NAC (Network Access Control) solution
                               for controlling the Laptops of externals connected to the
                               corporate network from BMPS locations
                           To be completed in 2019:
                           - Extension of encryption to Branches and completion for
                               General Management Division (March 2019)
                           - Extension of monitoring of System Administrators that

                             access the mainframe, which account for 20% of the
                             reference perimeter (April 2019).
                          - Extension of the new Identity Management infrastructure
                             to the development and testing environments (April
                             2019).
                          Finally, as far as the assigned budget is concerned, the
                          financial resources absorbed for project initiatives are
                          believed to be in line with the goals to be achieved.
Par Finding        #    8 A solution has been provided for that is broken down into
118 Weakness in the       technical, organisational and regulatory areas. It has
    Identity management   already been put underway with the establishment of a
    process of the COG    mixed Parent Company/COG work group, which has
                          identified the following areas of intervention:
                           - As a priority, the regulations will be updated with the
                             rules and responsibilities which all users responsible for
                             applications outside the OIM perimeter must strictly
                             comply with, and will identify the methods for monitoring
                             and controlling the behaviours applied. This activity is
                             expected to be completed by the end of the current
                             year.
                           - In parallel, work will begin on the implementation of a
                             technical-organisational solution to verify and control the
                             authorisation profiles on applications not integrated with
                             OIM, and, at the same time, an analysis will be carried
                             out on the possibility of integrating other currently out-of-
                             scope applications will also be analysed. This activity is
                             expected to be completed by 30 September 2019.
Par  Finding # 9          In this case too, a solution has been provided for that is
120  Weakness in          broken down into technical, organisational and regulatory
     privileged user      areas. It has already been put underway as part of the
     management and       mixed Parent Company/ COG work group. Note, however,
     monitoring process   that in this area, as noted by the Supervisor, control crash
     in the COG           activities have already been regularly carried out along
                          with a “clean-up” of users no longer necessary.
                          More specifically:
                           - As a priority, the current regulations regarding rules and
                             responsibilities will be updated and more precisely
                             identify the types of controls and responsibilities to be
                             assigned. This activity is expected to be completed by
                             the end of November 2018.
                           - In parallel:
                             Privileged user access will be secured, identified and
                             tracked through the implementation of the tool,
                             CyberArk (its deployment is part of the Monte Più Sicuro
                             Project). This implementation will be divided into two
                             steps, as shown in finding #7:
                             o Access to the departmental systems (70% of the total)
                                will be integrated in CyberArk by the end of this year
                             o Residual access to the mainframe will be integrated in
                                CyberArk by 30 April 2019.
Par  Finding # 10 Defects The mixed Parent Company/COG Work Group provides a
127  of the security      structured solution, as described below:
     incident
     management of the     - the revision (within the Cyber Incident Management
     COG                     process) of the classification of the criteria underlying
                             the distinction between “system incident” and “cyber
                             incident” will be completed by the end of November
                             2018.
                           - The project “Evoluzione SIEM” will define the

                           classification of severity of the offences and incidents
                           based on the type of asset and critical nature of the
                           processes to which they refer. The new classification
                           framework (criticality/impact) will be unique for all
                           structures involved in the process and provides for the
                           implementation of a structured review of rules on a
                           regular basis. This is expected to be completed by 30
                           April 2019.
                         - Completion of the “Evoluzione SIEM” initiative will
                           enable the activation and storage of logs currently not
                           included in the scope of the SIEM analysis. This activity
                           is expected to be completed by 30 April 2019.
                         - Finally, a review of the save and information storage
                           procedure will be put in place. This activity is expected
                           to be completed by 30 April 2019. Moreover, as of June
                           2018, data on the offenses identified will be stored for at
                           least one year.
Par Finding # 11 Defects Incident
132 on IT security in    A project to review Widiba’s Incident process has been
    Widiba               included in the Masterplan expiring in December 2018 so
                         as to make it operational by January 2019 with a first
                         phase of tuning. The main activities being analysed are
                         as follows:
                         1.         Determination of Incident by type (e.g. IT,
                         Security, Fraud, Data quality) and method of assigning
                         severity calculated on objective data and not just from
                         customer reports.
                         2.         Publication of IT Incident, Major Incident policy,
                         with various escalation processes.
                         3.         Management of incident management owners
                         with coordination of outsourcers
                         4.         Tracking of changes made in fix with matching
                         to the incident of reference.
                         5.         Monitoring of written code with a focus on the
                         SW’s stability and on the changes to critical components.
                         6.         Reporting for greater usability of data and KPIs
                         for IT Incidents.
                         All activities are expected to be completed by March
                         2019 – we estimate 3 months of Tuning in production for
                         the development of the process for both the application
                         and organisational components.
                         Monitoring
                         Correlations were introduced in September between
                         security threats (external attacks) and the monitoring of
                         systems: currently, alerts are highlighted in the
                         monitoring dashboard and managed by suitably trained
                         staff. Additional control will be added to correlate IT
                         threats with automatic alerts, so as to also cope with any
                         growth in volumes.
                         All activities are expected to be completed by March
                         2019.
                         Privileged users
                         By May 2018, Widiba had taken steps to make
                         corrections to the monitoring of Admin users, with a
                         system of alerts in the case of changes to monitoring
                         tools. More specifically:
                         1.         assignment of Balabit administration privileges
                         to non-system administrators for segregation of roles –
                         disabling of Balabit administrator privileges to current
                         system administrators;
                         2.         automatic sending of emails to mail group (bala-
                         sec@widiba.it) for all accesses to production and

                            changes to configuration to the Balabit platform (include
                            the sending of a notification email);
                            3.          group email alert to bala-sec@widiba.it on
                            direct access to firewall by system administrators. Each
                            access is notified to other persons in the group bala-
                            sec@widiba.it
                            4.          disabling of SSH service with notification to
                            mailbox bala-sec@widiba.it in order to centralise all
                            access to Balabit only from the web platform;
                            5.          optimised mail already existing for notification to
                            the systems group for all alerts signalled by the
                            monitoring systems including switch-off of alerts (manual
                            or automatic): extension to admins for reciprocal checks.
Par Finding # 12 The      A solution has already been put under way and is
145 BMPS’ PCOs are not    structured along two lines of activity:
    complete; the
    continuity risk could -     Mapping of critical/systemic processes and related
    not be mitigated for        assets: the update was completed in September 2018
    single process due          and takes account of the restore times established by
    to the inadequate           Bankit regulations (RTO). The output was shared with
    application mapping         the Consorzio Operativo. The Disaster Recovery test
                                scheduled for the weekend of 14 October will also
                                verify the restart times of the applications identified in
                                the BIA (Business Impact Analysis) relating to the
                                system processes being tested (see also finding # 14).
                          - Correlation with Risk Management: a process has
                                been identified that provides for a structured exchange
                                of     information    flows      between     the     Parent
                                Company/BCM Security function and the Risk
                                Management function in order to align the results of
                                the respective assessments. Furthermore, in order to
                                rectify any discrepancies already present in 2018, the
                                Parent Company/BCM Security Function will carry out
                                the appropriate checks with the individual process
                                owners and align the other function involved on the
                                results. This last activity will be concluded by the end
                                of this year.
Par Finding # 13            As at 31 May 2018, Widiba had concluded its preparation
149 Weakness in             of a backup environment on Siena’s servers with the
    Widiba’s BIA            replication of the development environment in order to
    process and in the      enable activation of the critical development process in a
    related risk            short time in the event of a CED fault in Via Messina
    assumption report       (Milan) with connection of resources in VPN to
                            emergency locations (e.g. MPS via Rosellini, Sorint
                            Bergamo or other locations in Milan or Siena).
                            Moreover, the BIA content was fully revised in the first
                            half of the year, leading to the identification of critical
                            processes and assigning a new assessment of
                            importance and risk to all the Bank’s functions. By the
                            end of the year, all the supporting documents for all the
                            solutions implemented will be produced and the
                            Business Continuity Plan (BCP) will be reviewed.
                            Only the Incident Management process was considered
                            in the BCP since all the applications are on 2
                            geographical sites in Active-Active mode and therefore
                            with mitigation of business continuity risk. This decision
                            will be reported in the “IT Strategic Guidance” which
                            Widiba will submit to the Board of Directors by the end of
                            2018, together with the new BIA and BCP solutions.
                            All documentation and methodology will be shared with
                            the appropriate Parent Company Functions, including the
                            ICT Compliance Function. Furthermore, it has been
                            agreed with the Parent Company that Widiba will adopt
                            the application solution which manages Business
                            Continuity at group level. As a preliminary step to
                            adopting the solution, the processes will be registered in

                           Aris; taking account of their high number, the first to be
                           registered will be those in the BCM environment, to allow
                           the execution of BIA from as early as 2019.
                           It is expected that all activities will be completed by the
                           end of 2018, except for the revision of the granularity of
                           the registration of processes which will be revised in the
                           course of 2019, together with the mapping of processes
                           in ARIS according to the Parent Company taxonomy.
Par Finding # 14 The       The Disaster Recovery plan has been updated to include
155 COG Disaster           the results from the 2018 BIA, which reports the
    Recovery test cannot   classification of processes and applications relating to
    demonstrate the        each of them. Each systemic process has the recovery
    respect of the restart times and RTO (Recovery Time Objective) associated to
    time limits for        it. During the next disaster recovery test (13-14 October)
    systemic processes     the restart times of applications relating to systemic
                           processes will be measured.
                           All activities are expected to be completed by November
                           2018.
Par Finding # 15 Delay in  As of July 2018, the Data Governance Function has
169 the implementation     changed its approach with the use of a more stringent
    of Data Governance     definition of “Relevant Output”, now limited to those
    project                reports with a structure bound by regulatory provisions.
                           At the same time, a “Data Driven” approach was
                           launched through the identification of the so-called
                           “Relevant Data Bases”, a Data Governance action plan
                           was established for 2018-2019 and a request was made
                           for the launch of two project activities (generally
                           communicated to the supervisory authority as “new
                           project initiatives”):
                           -          DataGov Evolution
                           -          New Data Quality infrastructure for regulatory
                           reporting (SISBA3)
                           The acquisition of the new Data Discovery and Lineage
                           systems has also been communicated.
                           In addition to what is known to the Bank of Italy, the Data
                           Governance Function is also preparing two new Group
                           Directives:
                           -          Acquisition and use of external data sources
                           -          Production and distribution of Divisional and
                           Network Reporting

