Calendario dei Seminari di Finanza Quantitativa In Prometeia
Mercoledi 24 Ottobre 2018, Ore 14:30
      Tim Verdonck
      Department of Mathematics, KU Leuven, Belgium
      Title: Fraud detection using analytics
      Abstract:
      The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimates that fraud costs organizations worldwide $3.7 trillion a
      year and that a typical company loses five percent of annual revenue due to fraud. Fraud attempts are expected
      to even increase further in future, making fraud detection highly necessary in most industries. A major
      challenge when building a supervised tool for fraud detection is the imbalance or skewness of the data. We
      review some methodologies to solve this issue. Moreover, we present unsupervised techniques from robust
      statistics and digit analysis to detect unusual observations that are likely associated with fraud. The discussed
      techniques can be applied across a wide variety of fraud applications, such as insurance fraud, credit card
      fraud, anti-money laundering, healthcare fraud, telecommunications fraud, click fraud, tax evasion, and
      counterfeiting
Mercoledi 30 Gennaio, 2019, Ore 14:30
      Daniele Tantari
      Department of Economics and Management
      University of Florence
      Title: Random models for financial networks: an application to the interbank market.
      Abstract:
      Finance provides a large set of situations where networks are present or can be constructed from data. A
      complex network representation of data focuses on the role of the interactions, beyond individuality, and
      allows microscopic predictions from the modeling of macroscopic structures. This can be done by introducing
      a class of random models with node-specific latent variables that can be used to both define macroscopic
      structures, detect them from data and modeling network dynamics. In this framework, I will discuss the
      problem of detecting macroscopic structures using the Stochastic Block Model and the problem of recognizing
      preferential relationships using a Dynamic Fitness model, with a particular focus on the e-MID interbank
      network.
Mercoledi 13 Febbraio, 2019, Ore 14:30
      Fabrizio Lillo
      Department of Mathematics,
      University of Bologna
      Title: Financial Data Science
      Abstract: The huge increase in data availability and the digital revolution are drastically changing the financial
      system, creating new opportunities but also new risks. In this talk I will review some aspects of Financial Data
      Science focusing primarily on the assessment of risk at the individual and systemic level. In particular I will
      focus on the relation between information (from news, blogs, Twitter, etc.) and price and on the role of
      financial networks (payments, credit, etc) in propagating risk. Some of the methodological solutions to the
      above problems have a range of applicability beyond the financial domain.

Mercoledi 20 Marzo, 2019, Ore 14:30
      Roy Cerqueti
      Dipartimento di Economia e Diritto
      Universita' di Macerata
Mercoledi 8 Maggio, 2019, Ore 14:30
      Nikola Gradojevic
      Professor of Finance
      College of Business and Economics
      Department of Economics and Finance
      University of Guelph
      50 Stone Road East
      Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada
      Title: Artificial Intelligence (AI) and its applications in the finance industry
      Abstract:
      We have witnessed a rapid expansion of AI such as artificial neural networks and fuzzy logic controllers in the
      finance industry in recent years. Its use is expanding because of improvements in technology, deregulation of
      markets and increased competition. While AI systems are making the work of finance professionals easier, they
      are still supervised by humans and thus prone to errors that may potentially pose risks to the industry. This
      seminar will discuss both benefits and threats of the use of AI in the finance industry.

