Guidance on leveraged
transactions
  May 2017

Contents
1      Introduction                                                   2
2      Scope of the guidance on leveraged transactions                3
3      Definition of leveraged transactions                           4
4      Risk appetite and governance                                   6
5      Syndication activities                                         7
6      Policies and procedures for new deal approval, and monitoring
       and managing of longer-term leveraged transaction holdings     9
       6.1     Credit approval                                        9
       6.2     Ongoing monitoring                                    10
7      Secondary market activities on leveraged transactions         12
8      Reporting requirements and Management Information Systems
       (MIS)                                                         13
9      Requirements following release of the ECB guidance            14
Guidance on leveraged transactions - Contents                         1

1 Introduction
  The prolonged period of very low interest rates and the ensuing search for yield
  strategies have warranted specific monitoring of credit quality by the European
  Central Bank (ECB) in general and of leveraged finance exposures in particular. In
  connection with this a number of credit institutions in different jurisdictions across the
  euro area were surveyed in 2015 to capture their involvement in leveraged finance
  activities.
  The outcome of the survey highlights that globally leveraged finance markets have
  experienced a strong recovery since the crisis and are characterised by fierce
  competition. Both the appetite to underwrite a transaction and the propensity to
  retain parts of the exposure have grown among the significant credit institutions
  supervised by the ECB.
  Borrower-friendly conditions have further translated into a weakening of deal
  structures (increased leverage levels, import of “covenant-lite” structures into
  European markets) and in many cases have led to greater leniency in credit
  institutions’ credit policies.
  Moreover, several areas for improvement in credit institutions’ monitoring practices
  have been identified, as well as significant discrepancies in individual institutions’
  approaches to defining, measuring and monitoring leveraged transactions.
  Considering the above-mentioned developments and in view of Articles 76 and 79 of
  Directive 2013/36/EU 1 and Recital 30 and Article 4(1)(e) of Council Regulation (EU)
  No 1024/2013 2 (the “SSM Regulation”), the ECB considers that closer supervisory
  scrutiny of leveraged transactions is justified. This closer scrutiny has led to the
  release of guidance from the ECB summarising key supervisory expectations
  concerning leveraged transactions, and the ongoing monitoring of both syndication
  risk and the fundamental credit quality of leveraged exposures.
  1
      Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the
      activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms,
      amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176,
      27.6.2013, p. 338).
  2
      Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European
      Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (OJ L 287,
      29.10.2013, p. 63).
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Introduction                                                               2

2 Scope of the guidance on leveraged
  transactions
  This guidance applies to all significant credit institutions supervised by the ECB
  under Article 6(4) of the SSM Regulation.
  While all significant credit institutions should make this guidance an integral part of
  their internal policies, the implementation of each aspect of this guidance is subject
  to the principle of proportionality. Accordingly the internal implementation of
  supervisory expectations expressed in this guidance should be consistent with the
  size and risk profile of institutions’ leveraged transactions relative to their assets,
  earnings and capital.
  Whereas this guidance focuses primarily on leveraged transactions, credit
  institutions are encouraged to apply the supervisory expectations expressed in this
  guidance to other types of transactions, where relevant.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Scope of the guidance on leveraged transactions    3

3 Definition of leveraged transactions
  Credit institutions should have in place, as part of their internal policies, a single and
  overarching definition of leveraged transactions. This definition would encompass all
  business units and geographical areas so as to enable the institution’s senior
  management 3 to have a comprehensive overview of the institution’s leveraged
  activities.
  As part of its internal definition and subject to the exclusions detailed below, the
  credit institution is expected to consider as a leveraged transaction any transaction
  that meets at least one of the conditions below:
  1.     all types of loan or credit exposure 4, 5 where the borrower’s post-financing level
         of leverage exceeds a Total Debt 6 to EBITDA 7 ratio of 4.0 times 8, 9;
  2.     all types of loan or credit exposures where the borrower is owned 10 by one or
         more financial sponsors 11.
  The following transactions are not expected to be covered by the leveraged
  transaction definition:
  1.     loans with natural persons, credit institutions, investment firms, public sector
         entities and financial sector entities 12;
  3
      “Senior management” has the meaning ascribed to it in point (9) of Article 3(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU.
  4
      Irrespective of the classification in the regulatory banking book or regulatory trading book.
  5
      For the purpose of this guidance, exposure refers to all gross direct commitments to a leveraged
      borrower, including drawn and undrawn facilities, term loans, bridge loans or revolving credit facilities,
      committed exposures not yet syndicated or distributed, and exposures being warehoused for a later
      sale.
  6
      The term “Total Debt” refers to total committed debt (including drawn and undrawn debt) and any
      additional debt that loan agreements may permit. Committed undrawn liquidity facilities, according to
      the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity risk
      monitoring tools (BCBS 238), are excluded. Cash should not be netted against debt. For the purpose of
      leverage multiple, when calculated at transaction origination, the pro forma financial statements of the
      resulting company after the transaction has taken place should be considered.
  7
      EBITDA refers to earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation. Any enhancements to
      EBITDA should be duly justified and reviewed by a function independent of the front office function.
  8
      The designation of a financing as a “leveraged transaction” is made at loan origination, modification or
      refinancing.
  9
      The leverage multiple should be calculated at the consolidated borrower level, unless group support
      cannot be assumed in case the borrowing entity is experiencing financial difficulties. Any deviation from
      the calculation at consolidated level should be justified and documented on a case-by-case basis.
  10
      As per point (37) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the
      Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and
      amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1) (the Capital Requirements
      Regulation – CRR), a financial sponsor (for which definition see footnote 11 below) is deemed to be the
      owner if it controls or owns more than 50% of the borrower’s equity.
  11
      The term “financial sponsor” refers to an investment firm that undertakes private equity investments in
      and/or leveraged buyouts of companies with the intention of exiting those investments on a medium-
      term basis.
  12
      The terms “credit institution”, “investment firm”, “public sector entity” and “financial sector entity” are
      defined in points (1), (2), (8) and (27) respectively of Article 4(1) of the CRR.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Definition of leveraged transactions                                       4

2.    loans where the own consolidated exposure of the credit institution is below €5
      million;
3.    loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) as defined by
      Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC13 except where the borrower is
      owned10 by one or more financial sponsors11;
4.    loans classified as specialised lending14;
5.    trade finance15;
6.    loans to investment-grade borrowers (i.e. with a rating equivalent to BBB-
      (S&P)/BBB- (Fitch)/Baa3 (Moody’s) or above16).
Moreover, the scope and implementation of the definition of a leveraged transaction
by a credit institution should be regularly reviewed by an appropriate independent
audit department to ensure that no undue exclusion has been made.
13
   Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small
   and medium-sized enterprises (OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36).
14
   The term “specialised lending” is defined in Article 147(8) of the CRR; and also in the EBA’s Regulatory
   Technical Standards on Assigning Risk Weights to Specialised Lending Exposures under Article 153(9)
   of the CRR; and in the BCBS’s Working Paper on the Internal Ratings-Based Approach to Specialised
   Lending Exposures of 2001. “Specialised lending” comprises project finance, real estate, object
   financing and commodities financing.
15
   As per Article 4(80) of the CRR, trade finance means financing, including guarantees, connected to the
   exchange of goods and services through financial products of fixed short-term maturity, generally of
   less than one year, without automatic rollover.
16
   If the borrower is not rated internally or externally, the investment grade exclusion test is redundant.
Guidance on leveraged transactions - Definition of leveraged transactions                                   5

4 Risk appetite and governance
  As part of their internal risk appetite framework, credit institutions should define their
  appetite and strategy for leveraged transactions, as defined above, in a way that
  encompasses the various business units involved in such operations. To this end
  senior management is expected to define, review and endorse at least on an annual
  basis the limits allocated to leveraged transactions. Exemptions and increases in
  limits, if any, should be duly justified.
  Credit institutions are expected to have a sound governance structure in place for
  leveraged transactions, enabling senior management to have a comprehensive and
  consistent oversight on all leveraged transactions originated, syndicated or
  purchased by a credit institution.
  The ECB considers that the following dimensions should be envisaged as minimum
  requirements.
  •     Irrespective of business organisation or commercial focus, senior management
        and risk management should have a consistent and integrated view of all
        leveraged transactions.
  •     All leveraged transactions that imply credit, syndication or underwriting risks
        should be preceded by a review and approval of an independent risk function.
        The scope of transactions should include all syndicated loans, including
        underwritten and “best efforts” deals 17, as well as “club deals” 18 and bilateral
        loans. The approval process should allow sufficient time for the risk function to
        review the transaction and ensure that it is in line with a credit institution’s risk
        appetite.
  •     Should the size of leveraged transactions be such that separate originating and
        trading functions are not required, a credit institution is nevertheless expected
        to have in place dedicated procedures and confidentiality requirements to
        ensure that potential conflicts of interest are prevented and that private
        information is kept confidential.
  17
      The term “best efforts deal” refers to a transaction where the arranger of the deal agrees to use all
      efforts to sell down as much of the loan as possible (although the arranger often commits to fund a
      small portion if the loan is fully syndicated, in what is known as “final take”). If the arranger is unable to
      sell down the entire amount, it is not responsible for any unsold portions.
  18
      A “club deal” refers to a transaction that is pre-marketed to a small group of lenders with an agreement
      before closing on individual banks’ loan attribution. A club deal may not be governed by a single loan
      agreement; however, participating lenders do usually reach agreement with the borrower on very
      similar, if not identical, terms.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Risk appetite and governance                                                 6

5 Syndication activities
  Credit institutions should define their appetite for syndicating leveraged transactions;
  this intention should be used to set a comprehensive limit framework, including
  dedicated underwriting limits and a granular set of sub-limits detailing both quantum
  and the nature of transactions that a credit institution is permitted to participate in.
  The internal standards and monitoring functions of a credit institution engaged in
  syndicating leveraged transactions should be mindful of the following aspects.
  •     The syndication unit should perform a detailed analysis to help price the loan;
        the price should be verified, prior to the granting of credit, by a function
        independent of the syndication unit.
  •     Each leveraged transaction posing an underwriting or syndication risk requires
        prior approval and a detailed analysis assessing the market’s ability to absorb
        the issuance and the related pricing risk for the credit institution.
  •     Credit institutions are expected to define acceptable leverage levels as part of
        their risk appetite statement, including at industry sector level when relevant.
        Syndicating transactions presenting high levels of leverage – defined as the
        ratio of Total Debt 19 to EBITDA 20 exceeding 6.0 times at deal inception – should
        remain exceptional (and a potential exception should be duly justified) and form
        part of the credit delegation and risk management escalation framework of the
        credit institution 21. For most industries, a leverage level in excess of 6.0 times
        Total Debt to EBITDA raises concerns.
  •     The syndication unit should monitor and report on an ongoing basis all the
        pending transactions to be syndicated, irrespective of the type of syndication.
        An independent risk function should be involved in the monitoring of the risks
        related to the credit institution’s syndication activities.
  •     To mitigate credit institutions’ exposure to a potential lack of investor appetite,
        the syndication unit should both monitor and target an appropriate
        diversification of investor categories 22. Distribution channels internal to credit
        institutions – such as other business units, other banking entities having the
        same parent company, or secondary trading desks – should be flagged and
        specifically monitored.
  19
      As defined above.
  20
      As defined above.
  21
      Supervisory expectations relating to the risk management of transactions that present high levels of
      leverage also apply to “club deals” and bilateral loan structures.
  22
      E.g. collateralised loan obligation funds, pension funds, insurers, loan funds, hedge funds or distressed
      funds, banks, other institutional investors.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Syndication activities                                                 7

•     Credit institutions are expected to develop a stress-testing framework aimed at
      capturing the impact of market-wide disruptions on the underwriting and
      syndication pipeline.
•     Credit institutions should identify transactions subject to failed syndications –
      that is, a transaction which has not been syndicated within 90 days following the
      commitment date 23. Credit institutions are expected to establish a dedicated
      framework to deal with these “hung transactions” in terms of holding strategy,
      booking and accounting practices, regulatory classification 24 and subsequent
      capital requirements calculation.
•     Credit institutions should have policies and procedures in place for reclassifying
      leveraged transactions for which a trading intent is no longer evident
      (specifically “hung transactions”) from the regulatory trading book to the
      regulatory banking book.
•     Credit institutions are expected to develop and ensure adherence to internal
      policies aimed at avoiding reputational risk or potential conflicts of interest when
      syndicating and distributing leveraged transactions.
23
   This date should be defined as the date on which the credit institution enters into a legally binding
   commitment vis-à-vis the counterparty to lend by virtue of an executed loan agreement; any exception
   to this timeline should be justified as part of the credit institution’s internal policies and procedures.
24
   The institution should define sound criteria for classifying/reclassifying leveraged transactions to/from
   the regulatory trading book and the regulatory banking book. More specifically, all leveraged
   transactions that meet the criteria of “trading intent”, as per the CRR, should be classified to the
   regulatory trading book.
Guidance on leveraged transactions - Syndication activities                                                   8

6   Policies and procedures for new deal
    approval, and monitoring and managing
    of longer-term leveraged transaction
    holdings
6.1 Credit approval
    Credit institutions should have in place a credit approval process for all leveraged
    transactions. The aim of the credit approval process is to ensure that transactions
    are aligned with a given credit institution’s risk appetite. A new transaction, a renewal
    or a refinancing of an existing leveraged transaction, as well as a material
    modification of an existing transaction, should trigger in-depth due diligence by the
    originating function and a critical review, to be performed by an independent risk
    function.
    The due diligence requirements should as a minimum include, but not be limited to,
    the following.
    •     An assessment of the industry sector and an in-depth assessment of the
          borrower; in particular, an assessment of the sustainability of the debt of the
          borrower should be performed to ascertain its ability to cover debt service by
          cash-flow generation. Credit institutions should ensure that the leveraged
          borrower has the capacity to repay a significant share of its debt or de-lever to a
          sustainable level within a reasonable time frame. An adequate repayment
          capacity is defined as the ability of the leveraged borrower to fully amortise
          senior secured debt or repay at least 50% of Total Debt over a period of five to
          seven years.
    •     A critical review of the business plan and projections provided by the corporate
          borrower or the private equity sponsor – this should be incorporated in a credit
          institution’s “base case” and “stress case” scenarios. The latter should be
          sufficiently conservative, capturing tail-end market events and idiosyncratic
          events throughout the life cycle of the transaction.
    •     An enterprise valuation of the borrower, where applicable, to be reviewed and
          validated by an independent unit other than the originating unit.
    •     An assessment of the structure of the transaction and related term sheets
          (covenant, leverage level, dividend distribution, capex features). Internal
          systems at credit institutions are expected to flag any structures presenting
          weak covenant features, such as the absence of any covenant, the absence of
          financial covenants in the contractual agreements with a borrower or the
          presence of significant headroom in these financial covenants. Any breach of
          covenant should also be tracked.
    Guidance on leveraged transactions - Policies and procedures for new deal approval, and
    monitoring and managing of longer-term leveraged transaction holdings                   9

    •     Credit and liquidity facilities granted to finance or back leveraged transactions
          should be adequately taken into account in the liquidity coverage requirement 25.
          When determining whether an off-balance-sheet commitment should be
          classified as a liquidity facility or a credit facility (as per Article 31(1) of
          Commission Delegated Regulation 2015/61), credit institutions should not
          consider only the formal denomination or the legal form of the facility. Both the
          assessment of the nature of the facility and a behavioural analysis of the
          borrower’s appetite to drawn commitments, including in times of stress (as per
          Article 5 of Commission Delegated Regulation No 2015/61), should be part of a
          sound classification of the commitment between a credit line and a liquidity line
          for the purpose of calculating the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR).
6.2 Ongoing monitoring
    Credit institutions should ensure regular monitoring of the portfolio, encompassing all
    relevant risks for leveraged transactions held for the longer term, including an update
    of the above-mentioned due diligence requirements. While the frequency of the
    review of “hold book” 26 exposures should occur at least once a year, it is expected
    that more targeted and frequent reviews be performed on deteriorated exposures
    (low ratings, high leverage, watch-listed, forborne performing and non-performing,
    defaulted).
    As part of the ongoing review, particular attention should be placed on the
    assessment of the debt repayment capacity of the borrower and whether the
    transaction and/or borrower is demonstrating indicators of financial difficulties or
    unlikeliness to pay (UTP) criteria.
    In this regard, it is necessary for credit institutions to have clearly defined internal
    criteria to identify indicators of UTP. These indicators should refer to clearly defined
    situations (UTP events). Credit institutions should ensure that their internal criteria in
    respect of non-performing exposures (NPE), default and impairment classification
    are fully aligned with all relevant regulatory, legal and accounting requirements 27 and
    the specificities of leveraged transactions (covenant breach, increase of leverage).
    Credit institutions are expected to assess the borrower for financial difficulty and
    conduct an impairment test in each of the following situations:
    •     breach of a material financial covenant or non-remediation of a covenant
          breach;
    25
        Article 31 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 of 10 October 2014 to supplement
        Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council with regard to liquidity
        coverage requirement for Credit Institutions (OJ L 11, 17.1.2015, p. 1).
    26
        “Hold book” refers to transactions kept by the institution as long-term risk positions. It includes all “final
        take” exposures and facilities to be syndicated that the institution has not been able to sell within 90
        days of the transaction closing.
    27
        See the EBA’s Implementing Technical Standard on Supervisory Reporting (Forbearance and non-
        performing exposures), under Article 99(4) of the CRR; the EBA’s Guidelines on the application of the
        definition of default, under Article 178 of the CRR; and the ECB’s Guidance to banks on non-performing
        loans.
    Guidance on leveraged transactions - Policies and procedures for new deal approval, and
    monitoring and managing of longer-term leveraged transaction holdings                                           10

•     where the transaction is a refinancing of an existing borrower at an increased
      level of leverage compared with respective leverage levels at origination or
      previous refinancing – that is, where the leverage level is defined as the ratio of
      Total Debt to EBITDA;
•     where the transaction is a refinancing of a borrower that was granted a bullet
      facility owing to financial difficulties or when it is expected that a bullet loan
      cannot be refinanced at current market conditions;
•     there are justified concerns about a borrower’s future ability to generate stable
      and sufficient cash flows as part of the “base case” and “stress case” scenarios
      outlined above.
The monitoring of exposures should be complemented by a stress-testing framework
that comprises severe but plausible scenarios leading to significant changes in risk
drivers, such as a surge in default rates, rating migrations or collateral discounts.
The stress of “hold book” exposures should be performed in addition to the stress-
testing framework referred to in section 5 above for the underwriting and syndication
pipeline.
The credit institution’s internal audit function is expected to perform a regular review
of leveraged transactions and of the compliance with this guidance as part of its
audit cycle, and at least every three years.
Guidance on leveraged transactions - Policies and procedures for new deal approval, and
monitoring and managing of longer-term leveraged transaction holdings                    11

7 Secondary market activities on
  leveraged transactions
  To avoid reputational risks, credit institutions’ compliance and risk management
  functions should put in place, and regularly review, policies and procedures to
  ensure proper adherence of secondary market transactions with regulations on
  market conduct (including Chinese walls) as well as appropriate treatment of
  privileged information received as part of primary issuances by origination teams.
  Secondary market leveraged transaction exposures should be reported as part of the
  global reporting on leveraged transactions, as per section 8 below.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Secondary market activities on leveraged
  transactions                                                                       12

8 Reporting requirements and
  Management Information Systems
  (MIS)
  Regular comprehensive reports 28 about trends in the leveraged markets and
  characteristics of a credit institution’s leveraged transactions should be sent to the
  senior management of each credit institution, including information about both the
  syndication pipeline and a credit institution’s “hold book”.
  The reports should cover at least the following aspects:
  •     key markets trends;
  •     information on all leveraged transactions across the various business units and
        geographies, taking into account both long-term credit exposures and the
        underwriting and syndication pipeline of leveraged transactions;
  •     the positioning of a credit institution with regard to internal limits 29 and the
        outcome of the stress scenarios performed as per sections 5 and 6 above;
  •     information on potential concentrations in terms of facility type, geography,
        sector or individual names and an overview of the quality (rating, share of non-
        performing loans/defaults, coverage by provisions) and profitability of
        transactions;
  •     a credit institution’s exposure to weak covenant features as defined above,
        flagging potential material breaches of covenants (these last points to be
        included in a dedicated section of the reports).
  MIS should be sufficiently granular and sound enough to enable management to
  identify, aggregate and monitor leveraged transactions and capture all the relevant
  aspects of this guidance.
  28
     Regular reports may form part of a broader reporting to senior management on credit and pipeline
     risks.
  29
     Including, but not restricted to, the positioning of the underwriting and syndication pipeline compared
     with the limit referred to in section 5 above.
  Guidance on leveraged transactions - Reporting requirements and Management Information
  Systems (MIS)                                                                                             13

                   9                Requirements following release of the
                                    ECB guidance
                                    This guidance enters into force six months after its publication. Eighteen months
                                    after publication an internal audit report shall be drawn up and submitted to the joint
                                    supervisory team, detailing how the expectations expressed in this guidance have
                                    been implemented by the credit institutions in their procedures.
© European Central Bank, 2017
Postal address                  60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Telephone                       +49 69 1344 0
Website                         www.ecb.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
                                    Guidance on leveraged transactions - Requirements following release of the ECB guidance       14

